LOANS - Section 3.2

RMS Manual of Examination Policies
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

INTRODUCTION

Section 39 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, Standards
for Safety and Soundness, requires each federal banking
agency to establish safety and soundness standards for all
insured depository institutions. Appendix A to Part 364 of
the FDIC Rules and Regulations, Interagency Guidelines
Establishing Standards for Safety and Soundness, sets out
the safety and soundness standards that the agencies use to
identify and address problems at insured depository
institutions before capital becomes impaired. Operational
and managerial safety and soundness standards pertaining
to an institution’s loan portfolio address areas such as asset
quality, internal controls, credit underwriting, and loan
documentation.
The examiner’s evaluation of an institution’s lending
policies, credit administration, and the quality of the loan
portfolio is among the most important aspects of the
examination process. To a great extent, the quality of an
institution's loan portfolio determines the risk to depositors
and to the FDIC's insurance fund. Conclusions regarding
the institution’s condition and the quality of its management
are weighted heavily by the examiner's findings with regard
to lending practices. Emphasis on review and evaluation of
the loan portfolio and its administration by institution
management during examinations recognizes that loans
comprise a major portion of most institutions’ assets; and,
that it is the asset category which ordinarily presents the
greatest credit risk and potential loss exposure to banks.
Moreover, pressure for increased profitability, liquidity
considerations, and a more complex society produce great
innovations in credit instruments and approaches to lending.
Loans have consequently become more complex.
Examiners therefore find it necessary to devote a large
portion of time and attention to loan portfolio examination.

LOAN ADMINISTRATION
Lending Policies

The examiner's evaluation of the loan portfolio involves
much more than merely appraising individual loans.
Prudent management and administration of the overall loan
account, including establishment of sound lending and
collection policies, are of vital importance if the institution
is to be continuously operated in an acceptable manner.
Lending policies should be clearly defined and set forth in
such a manner as to provide effective supervision by the
directors and senior officers. The board of directors of
every institution is responsible for formulating lending
policies and to supervise their implementation. Therefore
examiners should encourage establishment and
maintenance of written, up-to-date lending policies which
have been approved by the board of directors. A lending
policy should not be a static document, but must be
reviewed periodically and revised in light of changing
circumstances surrounding the borrowing needs of the
institution's customers as well as changes that may occur
within the institution itself. To a large extent, the economy
of the community served by the institution dictates the
composition of the loan portfolio. The widely divergent
circumstances of regional economies and the considerable
variance in characteristics of individual loans preclude
establishment of standard or universal lending policies.
There are, however, certain broad areas of consideration and
concern that are typically addressed in the lending policies
of all banks regardless of size or location. These include the
following:
• General fields of lending in which the institution will
engage and the kinds or types of loans within each
general field;
• Lending authority of each loan officer;
• Lending authority of a loan or executive committee, if
any;
• Responsibility of the board of directors in reviewing,
ratifying, or approving loans;
• Guidelines under which unsecured loans will be
granted;
• Guidelines for rates of interest and the terms of
repayment for secured and unsecured loans;
• Limitations on the amount advanced in relation to the
value of the collateral and the documentation required
by the institution for each type of secured loan;
• Guidelines for obtaining and reviewing real estate
appraisals as well as for ordering reappraisals, when
needed;
• Maintenance and review of complete and current
credit files on each borrower;
• Appropriate collection procedures including, but not
limited to, actions to be taken against borrowers who
fail to make timely payments;
• Limitations on the maximum volume of loans in
relation to total assets;
• Limitations on the extension of credit through
overdrafts;
• Description of the institution's normal trade area and
circumstances under which the institution may extend
credit outside of such area;
• Guidelines that address the goals for portfolio mix and
risk diversification and cover the institution's plans for
monitoring and taking appropriate corrective action, if
deemed necessary, on any concentrations that may
exist;
• Guidelines addressing the institution's loan review and
grading system ("Watch list");
 
• Guidelines addressing the institution's review of the
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (ALLL) or
ACL for loans and leases, as appropriate; and
• Guidelines for adequate safeguards to minimize
potential environmental liability.
Note: The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases
or ACL for loans and leases is the term used for those banks
that adopted ASU 2016-13, which implements ASC Topic
326, Financial Instruments – Credit Losses replacing the
allowance for loan losses used under the incurred loss
methodology.
The above are only guidelines for areas that should be
considered during the loan policy evaluation. Examiners
should also encourage management to develop specific
guidelines for each lending department or function. As with
overall lending policies, it is not the FDIC's intent to suggest
universal or standard loan policies for specific types of
credit. The establishment of these policies is the
responsibility of each institution's Board and management.
Therefore, the following discussion of basic principles
applicable to various types of credit will not include or
allude to acceptable ratios, levels, comparisons or terms.
These matters should, however, be addressed in each
institution's lending policy, and it will be the examiner's
responsibility to determine whether the policies are realistic
and being followed.
Much of the rest of this section of the Manual discusses
areas that should be considered in the institution's lending
policies. Guidelines for their consideration are discussed
under the appropriate areas.
Loan Review Systems
The terms loan review system or credit risk review system
refer to the responsibilities assigned to various areas such as
credit underwriting, loan administration, problem loan
workout, or other areas. Responsibilities may include
assigning initial credit grades, ensuring grade changes are
made when needed, or compiling information necessary to
assess the appropriateness of the ALLL or ACL for loans
and leases.
The complexity and scope of a loan review system will vary
based upon an institution’s size, type of operations, and
management practices. Systems may include components
that are independent of the lending function, or may place
some reliance on loan officers. Although smaller
institutions are not expected to maintain separate loan
review departments, it is essential that all institutions have
an effective loan review system. Regardless of its
complexity, an effective loan review system is generally
designed to address the following objectives:
• To promptly identify loans with well-defined credit
weaknesses so that timely action can be taken to
minimize credit loss;
• To provide essential information for determining the
appropriateness of the ALLL or ACL for loans and
leases;
• To identify relevant trends affecting the collectibility
of the loan portfolio and isolate potential problem
areas;
• To evaluate the activities of lending personnel;
• To assess the adequacy of, and adherence to, loan
policies and procedures, and to monitor compliance
with relevant laws and regulations;
• To provide the board of directors and senior
management with an objective assessment of the
overall portfolio quality; and
• To provide management with information related to
credit quality that can be used for financial and
regulatory reporting purposes.
Credit Risk Rating or Grading Systems
Accurate and timely credit grading is a primary component
of an effective loan review system. Credit grading involves
an assessment of credit quality, the identification of problem
loans, and the assignment of risk ratings. An effective
system provides information for use in establishing an
allowance when evaluating specific credits and for the
determination of an overall ALLL or ACL for loans and
leases, as appropriate.
Credit grading systems often place primary reliance on loan
officers for identifying emerging credit problems.
However, given the importance and subjective nature of
credit grading, a loan officer’s judgement regarding the
assignment of a particular credit grade should generally be
subject to review. Reviews may be performed by peers,
superiors, loan committee(s), or other internal or external
credit review specialists. Credit grading reviews performed
by individuals independent of the lending function are
preferred because they can often provide a more objective
assessment of credit quality. A loan review system typically
includes the following:
• A formal credit grading system that can be reconciled
with the framework used by federal regulatory
agencies;
• An identification of loans or loan pools that warrant
special attention;
• A mechanism for reporting identified loans, and any
corrective action taken, to senior management and the
board of directors; and
• Documentation of an institution’s credit loss
experience for various components of the loan and
lease portfolio.

Loan Review System Elements

Loan review policies are typically reviewed and approved
at least annually by the board of directors. Policy guidelines
include a written description of the overall credit grading
process, and establish responsibilities for the various loan
review functions. The policy generally addresses the
following items:
• Qualifications of loan review personnel;
• Independence of loan review personnel;
• Frequency of reviews;
• Scope of reviews;
• Depth of reviews;
• Review of findings and follow-up; and
• Workpaper and report distribution.
Qualifications of Loan Review Personnel
Personnel to involve in the loan review function are
qualified based on level of education, experience, and extent
of formal training. They are knowledgeable of both sound
lending practices and their own institution’s specific lending
guidelines. In addition, they are knowledgeable of pertinent
laws and regulations that affect lending activities.
Loan Review Personnel Independence
Loan officers are generally responsible for ongoing credit
analysis and the prompt identification of emerging
problems. Because of their frequent contact with
borrowers, loan officers can usually identify potential
problems before they become apparent to others. However,
institutions should be careful to avoid over reliance upon
loan officers. To avoid conflicts of interest, management
typically ensures that, when feasible, all significant loans
are reviewed by individuals that are not part of, or
influenced by anyone associated with, the loan approval
process.
Larger institutions typically establish separate loan review
departments staffed by independent credit analysts. Cost
and volume considerations may not justify such a system in
smaller institutions. Often, members of senior management
that are independent of the credit administration process, a
committee of outside directors, or an outside loan review
consultant fill this role. Regardless of the method used, loan
review personnel should report their findings directly to the
board of directors or a board committee.
Frequency of Reviews
The loan review function provides feedback on the
effectiveness of the lending process in identifying emerging
problems. Reviews of significant credits are generally
performed annually, upon renewal, or more frequently when
factors indicate a potential for deteriorating credit quality.
A system of periodic reviews is particularly important to the
process of determining the ALLL or the ACL for loans and
leases, as appropriate.
Scope of Reviews
Reviews typically cover all loans that are considered
significant. In addition to loans over a predetermined size,
management will normally review smaller loans that present
elevated risk characteristics such as credits that are
delinquent, on nonaccrual status, restructured as a troubled
debt, previously classified, or designated as Special
Mention. Additionally, management may wish to
periodically review insider loans, recently renewed credits,
or loans affected by common repayment factors. The
percentage of the portfolio selected for review should
provide reasonable assurance that all major credit risks have
been identified.
Depth of Reviews
Loan reviews typically analyze a number of important credit
factors, including:
• Credit quality;
• Sufficiency of credit and collateral documentation;
• Proper lien perfection;
• Proper loan approval;
• Adherence to loan covenants;
• Compliance with internal policies and procedures, and
applicable laws and regulations; and
• The accuracy and timeliness of credit grades assigned
by loan officers.
Review of Findings and Follow-up
Loan review findings should be reviewed with appropriate
loan officers, department managers, and members of senior
management. Typically, any existing or planned corrective
action (including estimated timeframes) is obtained for all
noted deficiencies, with those deficiencies that remain
unresolved reported to senior management and the board of
directors.
Workpaper and Report Distribution
A list of the loans reviewed, including the review date, and
documentation supporting assigned ratings is commonly
prepared. A report that summarizes the results of the review
is typically submitted to the board at least quarterly.
Findings usually address adherence to internal policies and
procedures, and applicable laws and regulations, so that

deficiencies can be remedied in a timely manner.
Examiners should review the written response from
management in response to any substantive criticisms or
recommendations and assess corrective actions taken.
Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL)
The Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) methodology
as implemented by FASB Accounting Standards
Codification (ASC) Subtopic 326-20, Financial Instruments
– Credit Losses – Measured at Amortized Cost applies to
financial assets measured at amortized cost, net investments
in leases, and off-balance-sheet credit exposures
(collectively, financial assets). For institutions that are SEC
filers, excluding those that are “smaller reporting
companies” as defined in the SEC’s rules, the CECL
methodology is effective for fiscal years beginning January
1, 2020, for institutions with calendar year fiscal years. For
all other institutions, (i.e., non-public institutions),
including those SEC filers that are smaller reporting
companies, CECL will take effect for institutions with
calendar year fiscal years beginning after December 15,
2022, (i.e., January 1, 2023).
The CECL methodology does not apply to financial assets
measured at fair value through net income, including those
assets for which the fair value option has been elected; loans
held-for-sale; policy loan receivables of an insurance entity;
loans and receivables between entities under common
control; and receivables arising from operating leases.
Available-for-sale debt securities are not covered under the
CECL methodology but are covered by ASC Subtopic 326-
30, Financial Instruments – Credit Losses – Available-forSale Debt Securities for institutions that have adopted ASC
Topic 326.
The allowance for credit losses or ACL for loans and leases
is a valuation account that is deducted from, or added to, the
amortized cost basis of financial assets to present the net
amount expected to be collected over the contractual term
of the assets, considering expected prepayments. Renewals,
extensions, and modifications are excluded from the
contractual term of a financial asset for purposes of
estimating the ACL for loans and leases unless there is a
reasonable expectation of executing a troubled debt
restructuring or the renewal and extension options are part
of the original or modified contract and are not
unconditionally cancellable by the institution.
In estimating the net amount expected to be collected,
management should consider the effects of past events,
current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts
on the collectibility of the institution’s financial assets.
Under the CECL methodology, inputs will need to change
in order to achieve an appropriate estimate of expected
credit losses. For example, inputs to a loss rate method
would need to reflect expected losses over the contractual
term, rather than the annual loss rates commonly used under
the existing incurred loss methodology. To properly apply
an acceptable estimation method, an institution’s credit loss
estimates must be well supported.
Similar to the ALLL, the ACL for loans and leases is
evaluated as of the end of each reporting period and reported
in the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call
Report). The methods used to determine ACLs generally
should be applied consistently over time and reflect
management’s current expectations of credit losses.
Changes to ACL for loans and leases resulting from these
periodic evaluations are recorded through increases or
decreases to the related provisions for credit losses (PCLs).
Throughout this Section 3.2, Loans, references pertaining
to the ALLL describe the incurred methodology and apply
only to institutions that have not yet adopted ASC Topic 326.
As such, the methodology for impairment contained in ASC
Subtopic 310-10, Receivables - Overall and collective loan
impairment contained in ASC Subtopic 450-20,
Contingencies – Loss Contingencies has been superseded
and is not applicable for institutions that have adopted ASC
Topic 326 (CECL). Therefore, for those institutions that
have adopted CECL, examiners should refer to the Call
Report Glossary entry for “allowance for credit losses” and
the, “Interagency Policy Statement on Credit Losses,”
issued May 8, 2020, via FIL 54-2020, for additional
information on the CECL methodology.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (ALLL)
Each institution must maintain an ALLL that is appropriate
to absorb estimated credit losses associated with the held for
investment loan and lease portfolio, i.e., loans and leases
that the institution has the intent and ability to hold for the
foreseeable future or until maturity or payoff. Each
institution should also maintain, as a separate liability
account, an allowance sufficient to absorb estimated credit
losses associated with off-balance sheet credit instruments
such as loan commitments, standby letters of credit, and
guarantees. This separate liability account for estimated
credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures should
not be reported as part of the ALLL on an institution’s
balance sheet. Loans and leases held for sale are carried on
the balance sheet at the lower of cost or fair value, with a
separate valuation allowance. This separate valuation
allowance should not be included as part of the ALLL and
accordingly regulatory capital.
The term "estimated credit losses" means an estimate of the
current amount of the loan and lease portfolio (net of
unearned income) that is not likely to be collected; that is,
net charge-offs that are likely to be realized for a loan, or
pool of loans. The estimated credit losses should meet the
criteria for accrual of a loss contingency (i.e., a provision to
the ALLL) set forth in generally accepted accounting
principles (U.S. GAAP). When available information
confirms specific loans and leases, or portions thereof, to be
uncollectible, these amounts should be promptly chargedoff against the ALLL.
Estimated credit losses should reflect consideration of all
significant factors that affect repayment as of the evaluation
date. Estimated losses on loan pools should reflect
historical net charge-off levels for similar loans, adjusted for
changes in current conditions or other relevant factors.
Calculation of historical charge-off rates can range from a
simple average of net charge-offs over a relevant period, to
more complex techniques, such as migration analysis.
Portions of the ALLL can be attributed to, or based upon the
risks associated with, individual loans or groups of loans.
However, the ALLL is available to absorb credit losses that
arise from the entire portfolio. It is not segregated for any
particular loan, or group of loans.
Responsibility of the Board and Management
It is the responsibility of the board of directors and
management to maintain the ALLL at an appropriate level.
The allowance should be evaluated, and appropriate
provisions made, at least quarterly. In carrying out their
responsibilities, the board and management are expected to:
• Establish and maintain a loan review system that
identifies, monitors, and addresses asset quality
problems in a timely manner.
• Ensure the prompt charge-off of loans, or portions of
loans, deemed uncollectible.
• Ensure that the process for determining an appropriate
allowance level is based on comprehensive,
adequately documented, and consistently applied
analysis.
For purposes of Reports of Condition and Income (Call
Reports) an appropriate ALLL for loans held for investment
should consist of the following items:
• The amount of allowance related to loans individually
evaluated and determined to be impaired under ASC
(Accounting Standards Codification) Subtopic 310-10,
Receivables - Overall.
• The amount of allowance related to loans that were
individually evaluated for impairment and determined
not to be impaired, as well as other loans collectively
evaluated under ASC Subtopic 450-20, Contingencies
– Loss Contingencies.
• The amount of allowance related to loans evaluated
under ASC Subtopic 310-30, Receivables –Loans and
Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit
Quality.
• The amount of allowance related to international
transfer risk associated with its cross-border lending
exposure.
Furthermore, management’s analysis of an appropriate
allowance level requires significant judgement in
determining estimates of credit losses. An institution may
support its estimate through qualitative factors that adjust
historical loss rates or an unallocated portion that can be
supported through a similar analysis.
When determining an appropriate allowance, primary
reliance should normally be placed on analysis of the
various components of a portfolio, including all significant
credits reviewed on an individual basis. Examiners should
refer to ASC Subtopic 310-10 for guidance in establishing
an allowance for individually evaluated loans determined to
be impaired and measured under that standard. When
analyzing the appropriateness of an allowance, portfolios
evaluated collectively should group loans with similar
characteristics, such as risk classification, past due status,
type of loan, industry, or collateral. A depository institution
may, for example, analyze the following groups of loans and
provide for them in the ALLL:
• Significant credits reviewed on an individual basis
(i.e., impaired loans);
• Loans and leases that are not reviewed individually,
but which present elevated risk characteristics, such as
delinquency, adverse classification, or Special
Mention designation;
• Homogenous loans that are not reviewed individually,
and do not present elevated risk characteristics; and
• All other loans that have not been considered or
provided for elsewhere.
In addition to estimated credit losses, the losses that arise
from the transfer risk associated with an institution’s crossborder lending activities require special consideration.
Over and above any minimum amount that is required by
the Interagency Country Exposure Review Committee to be
provided in the Allocated Transfer Reserve (or charged to
the ALLL), an institution must determine if their ALLL is
appropriate to absorb estimated losses from transfer risk
associated with its cross-border lending exposure.
Factors to Consider in Estimating Credit Losses
Estimated credit losses should reflect consideration of all
significant factors that affect the portfolio’s collectibility as
of the evaluation date. While historical loss experience
provides a reasonable starting point, historical losses, or
even recent trends in losses, are not by themselves, a
sufficient basis to determine an appropriate ALLL level.
Management should also consider any relevant qualitative
factors that are likely to cause estimated losses to differ from
historical loss experience such as:
• Changes in lending policies and procedures, including
underwriting, collection, charge-off and recovery
practices;
• Changes in local and national economic and business
conditions;
• Changes in the volume or type of credit extended;
• Changes in the experience, ability, and depth of
lending management;
• Changes in the volume and severity of past due,
nonaccrual, troubled debt restructurings, or classified
loans;
• Changes in the quality of an institution’s loan review
system or the degree of oversight by the board of
directors; and
• The existence of, or changes in the level of, any
concentrations of credit.
Institutions are also encouraged to use ratio analysis as a
supplemental check for evaluating the overall
reasonableness of an ALLL. Ratio analysis can be useful in
identifying trends in the relationship of the ALLL to
classified and nonclassified credits, to past due and
nonaccrual loans, to total loans and leases and binding
commitments, and to historical charge-off levels. However,
while such comparisons can be helpful as a supplemental
check of the reasonableness of management’s assumptions
and analysis, they are not, by themselves, a sufficient basis
for determining an appropriate ALLL. Such comparisons
do not eliminate the need for a comprehensive analysis and
documentation of the loan and lease portfolio and the factors
affecting its collectibility.
Examiner Responsibilities
Generally, following the quality assessment of the loan and
lease portfolio, the loan review system, and the lending
policies, examiners are responsible for assessing the
appropriateness of the ALLL. Examiners should consider
all significant factors that affect the collectibility of the
portfolio. Examination procedures for reviewing the
appropriateness of the ALLL are included in the
Examination Documentation (ED) Modules.
In assessing the overall appropriateness of an ALLL, it is
important to recognize that the related process,
methodology, and underlying assumptions require a
substantial degree of judgement. Credit loss estimates will
not be precise due to the wide range of factors that must be
considered. Furthermore, the ability to estimate credit
losses on specific loans and categories of loans should
improve over time. Therefore, examiners will generally
accept management’s estimates of credit losses in their
assessment of the overall appropriateness of the ALLL
when management has:
• Maintained effective systems and controls for
identifying, monitoring and addressing asset quality
problems in a timely manner;
• Analyzed all significant factors that affect the
collectibility of the portfolio; and
• Established an acceptable ALLL evaluation process
that meets the objectives for an appropriate ALLL.
If, after the completion of all aspects of the ALLL review
described in this section, the examiner does not concur that
the reported ALLL level is appropriate, or the ALLL
evaluation process is deficient, recommendations for
correcting these problems, including any examiner concerns
regarding an appropriate level for the ALLL, should be
noted in the Report of Examination.
Regulatory Reporting of the ALLL
An ALLL established in accordance with the guidelines
provided above should fall within a range of acceptable
estimates. When an ALLL is not deemed at an appropriate
level, management will be required to increase the provision
for loan and lease loss expense sufficiently to restore the
ALLL reported in its Call Report to an appropriate level.
Accounting and Reporting Treatment
ASC Subtopic 450-20 provides the basic guidance for
recognition of a loss from a contingency that should be
accrued through a charge to income (i.e., a provision
expense) when available information indicates that it is
probable the asset has been impaired and the amount is
reasonably estimated. ASC Subtopic 310-10 provides
specific guidance about the measurement and disclosure for
loans individually evaluated and determined to be impaired.
Loans are considered to be impaired when, based on current
information and events, it is probable that the creditor will
be unable to collect all interest and principal payments due
according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement.
This would generally include all loans restructured as a
troubled debt and nonaccrual loans.
For individually impaired loans, ASC Subtopic 310-10
provides guidance on the acceptable methods to measure
impairment. Specifically, this standard states that when a
loan is impaired, a creditor should measure impairment
based on the present value of expected future cash flows
discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, except that as
a practical expedient, a creditor may measure impairment
based on a loan’s observable market price. However, the
Call Report instructions require an institution to use the fair

value of the collateral in its determination of impairment for
all impaired collateral dependent loans. When developing
the estimate of expected future cash flows for a loan, an
institution should consider all available information
reflecting past events and current conditions, including the
effect of existing qualitative factors.
Large groups of smaller-balance homogenous loans are not
included in the scope of ASC Subtopic 310-10, unless the
loan is a troubled debt restructuring. Such groups of loans
may include, but are not limited to, credit card, residential
mortgage, and consumer installment loans. Examiners
should refer to ASC Subtopic 450-20 for loans collectively
evaluated for impairment, as well as individual loans that
are identified for evaluation on an individual basis and
determined not to be impaired.
Institutions should not layer their loan loss allowances.
Layering is the inappropriate practice of recording estimates
in the ALLL for the same loan under the different
accounting standards. Layering can happen when an
institution measures impairment on an individually
impaired loan and includes that same loan in its estimate of
loan losses on a collective basis, thereby estimating the loan
loss for the same loan twice.
While different institutions may use different methods,
there are certain common elements that should be included
in any ALLL methodology. Generally, an institution’s
methodology should:
• Include a detailed loan portfolio analysis, performed
regularly;
• Consider all loans (whether on an individual or group
basis);
• Identify loans to be evaluated for impairment on an
individual basis under ASC Subtopic 310-10; loans
evaluated under ASC Subtopic 310-30; and segment
the remainder of the portfolio into groups of loans
with similar risk characteristics for evaluation and
analysis under ASC Subtopic 450-20;
• Consider all known relevant internal and external
factors that may affect loan collectibility;
• Be applied consistently but, when appropriate, be
modified for new factors affecting collectibility;
• Consider the particular risks inherent in different
kinds of lending;
• Consider current collateral values (less costs to sell),
where applicable;
• Require that analyses, estimates, reviews and other
ALLL methodology functions be performed by
competent and well-trained personnel;
• Be based on current and reliable data;
• Be well-documented, in writing, with clear
explanations of the supporting analyses and rationale;
and
• Include a systematic and logical method to consolidate
the loss estimates and ensure the ALLL balance is
recorded in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
A systematic methodology that is properly designed and
implemented should result in an institution’s best estimate
of the ALLL. Accordingly, institutions should adjust their
ALLL balance, either upward or downward, in each period
for differences between the results of the systematic
determination process and the unadjusted ALLL balance in
the general ledger.
Examiners are encouraged, with the acknowledgement of
management, to communicate with an institution’s external
auditors and request an explanation of their rationale and
findings, when differences in judgment concerning the
appropriateness of the institution's ALLL exist. In case of
controversy, an institution and its auditor may be reminded
when an institution's supervisory agency's interpretation on
how U.S. GAAP should be applied to a specified event or
transaction (or series of related events or transactions)
differs from the institution's interpretation, the supervisory
agency may require the institution to reflect the event(s) or
transaction(s) in its Call Report in accordance with the
agency's interpretation and to amend previously submitted
reports.
Additional information on the documentation of the ALLL,
including its methodology, and the establishment of loan
review systems is provided in the Interagency Statement of
Policy on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses,
(including frequently asked questions) dated December 13,
2006, and the Interagency Policy Statement on Allowance
for Loan and Lease Losses Methodologies and
Documentation for Banks and Savings Associations, dated
July 2, 2001.

PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION
Commercial Loans
General
Loans to business enterprises for commercial or industrial
purposes, whether proprietorships, partnerships or
corporations, are commonly described as commercial loans.
In asset distribution, commercial or business loans
frequently comprise one of the most important assets of an
institution. They may be secured or unsecured and have
short or long-term maturities. Such loans include working
 


capital advances, term loans and loans to individuals for
business purposes.
Short-term working capital and seasonal loans provide
temporary capital in excess of normal needs. They are used
to finance seasonal requirements and are repaid at the end
of the cycle by converting inventory and accounts
receivable into cash. Such loans may be unsecured;
however, many working capital loans are advanced with
accounts receivable and/or inventory as collateral. Firms
engaged in manufacturing, distribution, retailing and
service-oriented businesses use short-term working capital
loans.
Term business loans have assumed increasing importance.
Such loans normally are granted for the purpose of
acquiring capital assets, such as plant and equipment. Term
loans may involve a greater risk than do short-term
advances, because of the length of time the credit is
outstanding. Because of the potential for greater risk, term
loans are usually secured and generally require regular
amortization. Loan agreements on such credits may contain
restrictive covenants during the life of the loan. In some
instances, term loans may be used as a means of liquidating,
over a period of time, the accumulated and unpaid balance
of credits originally advanced for seasonal needs. While
such loans may reflect a borrower's past operational
problems, they may well prove to be the most viable means
of salvaging a problem situation and effecting orderly debt
collection.
Commercial lending policies generally address acquisition
of credit information, such as property, operating and cash
flow statements; factors that might determine the need for
collateral acquisition; acceptable collateral margins;
perfecting liens on collateral; lending terms, and chargeoffs.
Accounts Receivable Financing
Accounts receivable financing is a specialized area of
commercial lending in which borrowers assign their
interests in accounts receivable to the lender as collateral.
Typical characteristics of accounts receivable borrowers are
those businesses that are growing rapidly and need
year-round financing in amounts too large to justify
unsecured credit, those that are nonseasonal and need
year-round financing because working capital and profits
are insufficient to permit periodic cleanups, those whose
working capital is inadequate for the volume of sales and
type of operation, and those whose previous unsecured
borrowings are no longer warranted because of various
credit factors.
Several advantages of accounts receivable financing from
the borrower's viewpoint are: it is an efficient way to
finance an expanding operation because borrowing capacity
expands as sales increase; it permits the borrower to take
advantage of purchase discounts because the company
receives immediate cash on its sales and is able to pay trade
creditors on a satisfactory basis; it insures a revolving,
expanding line of credit; and actual interest paid may be no
more than that for a fixed amount unsecured loan.
Advantages from the institution's viewpoint are: it generates
a relatively high yield loan, new business, and a depository
relationship; permits continuing banking relationships with
long-standing customers whose financial conditions no
longer warrant unsecured credit; and minimizes potential
loss when the loan is geared to a percentage of the accounts
receivable collateral. Although accounts receivable loans
are collateralized, it is important to analyze the borrower's
financial statements. Even if the collateral is of good quality
and in excess of the loan, the borrower must demonstrate
financial progress. Full repayment through collateral
liquidation is normally a solution of last resort.
Institutions use two basic methods to make accounts
receivable advances. First, blanket assignment, wherein the
borrower periodically informs the institution of the amount
of receivables outstanding on its books. Based on this
information, the institution advances the agreed percentage
of the outstanding receivables. The receivables are usually
pledged on a non-notification basis and payments on
receivables are made directly to the borrower who then
remits them to the institution. The institution applies all or
a portion of such funds to the borrower's loan. Second,
ledgering the accounts, wherein the lender receives
duplicate copies of the invoices together with the shipping
documents and/or delivery receipts. Upon receipt of
satisfactory information, the institution advances the agreed
percentage of the outstanding receivables. The receivables
are usually pledged on a notification basis. Under this
method, the institution maintains complete control of the
funds paid on all accounts pledged by requiring the
borrower's customer to remit directly to the institution.
In the area of accounts receivable financing, an institution's
lending policy typically addresses the acquisition of credit
information such as property, operating and cash flow
statements. It also typically addresses maintenance of an
accounts receivable loan agreement that establishes a
percentage advance against acceptable receivables, a
maximum dollar amount due from any one account debtor,
financial strength of debtor accounts, insurance that
"acceptable receivables" are defined in light of the turnover
of receivables pledged, aging of accounts receivable, and
concentrations of debtor accounts.
Leveraged Lending
 
  

The federal institution regulatory agencies initially issued
guidance on April 9, 2001, concerning sound risk
management practices for institutions engaged in leveraged
financing. In light of the developments and experience
gained since the initial guidance was issued, the federal
institution regulatory agencies issued new Interagency
Guidance on Leveraged Lending on May 21, 2013, to
update and replace the 2001 guidance. Examiners should
also review the related Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
issued on November 7, 2014.
Applicability
A financial institution’s risk management practices should
be consistent with the size and risk profile of its leveraged
activities relative to its assets, earnings, liquidity, and
capital. Institutions that originate or sponsor leveraged
transactions can refer to the guidance for suggestions about
sound risk management principles.
The agencies do not intend for a financial institution that
originates a small number of less complex, leveraged loans
to have policies and procedures commensurate with a larger,
more complex leveraged loan origination business.
However, any financial institution that participates in
leveraged lending transactions may refer to and consider
supervisory guidance provided in the “Participations
Purchased” section of the guidance.
General
Leveraged lending is an important type of financing for
national and global economies, and the U.S. financial
industry plays an integral role in making credit available and
syndicating that credit to investors. In particular, financial
institutions should ensure they do not unnecessarily
heighten risks by originating poorly underwritten loans. For
example, a poorly underwritten leveraged loan that is
pooled with other loans or is participated with other
institutions may generate risks for the financial system.
Numerous definitions of leveraged lending exist throughout
the financial services industry and commonly contain some
combination of the following:
• Proceeds used for buyouts, acquisitions, or capital
distributions.
• Transactions where the borrower’s Total Debt divided
by EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation, and amortization) or Senior Debt divided
by EBITDA exceed 4.0X EBITDA or 3.0X EBITDA,
respectively, or other defined levels appropriate to the
industry or sector.
• A borrower recognized in the debt markets as a highly
leveraged firm, which is characterized by a high debtto-net-worth ratio.
• Transactions when the borrower’s post-financing
leverage, as measured by its leverage ratios (for
example, debt-to-assets, debt-to-net-worth, debt-tocash flow, or other similar standards common to
particular industries or sectors), significantly exceeds
industry norms or historical levels.
A financial institution engaging in leveraged lending
typically defines the activity within its policies and
procedures in a manner sufficiently detailed to ensure
consistent application across all business lines. An
appropriate definition describes clearly the purposes and
financial characteristics common to these transactions, and
covers risk from both direct exposure and indirect exposure
via limited recourse financing secured by leveraged loans,
or financing extended to financial intermediaries (such as
conduits and special purpose entities (SPEs)) that hold
leveraged loans.
In general, sound risk management of leveraged lending
activities places importance on institutions developing and
maintaining the following:
• Transactions structured to reflect a sound business
premise, an appropriate capital structure, and
reasonable cash flow and balance sheet leverage.
Combined with supportable performance projections,
these elements of a safe-and-sound loan structure
should clearly support a borrower’s capacity to repay
and to de-lever to a sustainable level over a reasonable
period, whether underwritten to hold or distribute;
• A definition of leveraged lending that facilitates
consistent application across all business lines;
• Well-defined underwriting standards that, among
other things, define acceptable leverage levels and
describe amortization expectations for senior and
subordinate debt;
• A credit limit and concentration framework consistent
with the institution’s risk appetite;
• Sound Management Information Systems (MIS) that
enable management to identify, aggregate, and
monitor leveraged exposures and comply with policy
across all business lines;
• Strong pipeline management policies and procedures
that, among other things, provide for real-time
information on exposures and limits, and exceptions to
the timing of expected distributions and approved hold
levels; and
• Guidelines for conducting periodic portfolio and
pipeline stress tests to quantify the potential impact of
economic and market conditions on the institution’s
asset quality, earnings, liquidity, and capital.
Risk Management Framework
 
  

Given the high-risk profile of leveraged transactions,
prudent financial institutions engaged in leveraged lending
adopt a risk management framework that has an intensive
and frequent review and monitoring process. The
framework has as its foundation written risk objectives, risk
acceptance criteria, and risk controls. A lack of robust risk
management processes and controls at a financial institution
with significant leveraged lending activities could
contribute to supervisory findings that the financial
institution is engaged in unsafe-and-unsound banking
practices.
General Policies
A financial institution’s credit policies and procedures for
leveraged lending generally address the following:
• Identification of the financial institution’s risk appetite
including clearly defined amounts of leveraged
lending that the institution is willing to underwrite (for
example, pipeline limits) and is willing to retain (for
example, transaction and aggregate hold levels). The
designated risk appetite is commonly supported by an
analysis of the potential effect on earnings, capital,
liquidity, and other risks that result from these
positions, and is approved by the board of directors;
• A limit framework that includes limits or guidelines
for single obligors and transactions, aggregate hold
portfolio, aggregate pipeline exposure, and industry
and geographic concentrations. This limit framework
identifies the related management approval authorities
and exception tracking provisions. In addition to
notional pipeline limits, financial institutions with
significant leveraged transactions implement
underwriting limit frameworks that assess stress
losses, flex terms, economic capital usage, and
earnings at risk or that otherwise provide a more
nuanced view of potential risk;
• Procedures for ensuring the risks of leveraged lending
activities are appropriately reflected in an institution’s
allowance for loan and lease losses (ALLL) and
capital adequacy analyses;
• Credit and underwriting approval authorities,
including the procedures for approving and
documenting changes to approved transaction
structures and terms;
• Guidelines for appropriate oversight by senior
management, including adequate and timely reporting
to the board of directors;
• Expected risk-adjusted returns for leveraged
transactions;
• Minimum underwriting standards (see “Underwriting
Standards” section below); and,
• Effective underwriting practices for primary loan
origination and secondary loan acquisition.
Participations Purchased
Well-managed financial institutions purchasing
participations and assignments in leveraged lending
transactions make a thorough, independent evaluation of the
transaction and the risks involved before committing any
funds. They should apply the same standards of prudence,
credit assessment and approval criteria, and in-house limits
that would be employed if the purchasing organization were
originating the loan. Policies typically include requirements
for:
• Obtaining and independently analyzing full credit
information both before the participation is purchased
and on a timely basis thereafter;
• Obtaining from the lead lender copies of all executed
and proposed loan documents, legal opinions, title
insurance policies, Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)
searches, and other relevant documents;
• Carefully monitoring the borrower’s performance
throughout the life of the loan; and
• Establishing appropriate risk management guidelines
as described in this document.
Underwriting Standards
A financial institution’s underwriting standards should be
clear, written and measurable, and should accurately reflect
the institution’s risk appetite for leveraged lending
transactions. Examiners should review whether a financial
institution has clear underwriting limits regarding leveraged
transactions, including the size that the institution will
arrange both individually and in the aggregate for
distribution. Legal and other risks associated with poorly
underwritten transactions may find their way into a wide
variety of investment instruments and exacerbate systemic
risks within the general economy. An institution’s
underwriting standards typically consider the following:
• Whether the business premise for each transaction is
sound and the borrower’s capital structure is
sustainable regardless of whether the transaction is
underwritten for the institution’s own portfolio or with
the intent to distribute.
• A borrower’s capacity to repay and ability to de-lever
to a sustainable level over a reasonable period.
• Expectations for the depth and breadth of due
diligence on leveraged transactions.
• Standards for evaluating expected risk-adjusted
returns.
• The degree of reliance on enterprise value and other
intangible assets for loan repayment, along with
acceptable valuation methodologies, and guidelines
for the frequency of periodic reviews of those values;
 
  

• Expectations for the degree of support provided by the
sponsor (if any), taking into consideration the
sponsor’s financial capacity, the extent of its capital
contribution at inception, and other motivating factors.
• Whether credit agreement terms allow for the material
dilution, sale, or exchange of collateral or cash flowproducing assets without lender approval;
• Credit agreement covenant protections, including
financial performance (such as debt-to-cash flow,
interest coverage, or fixed charge coverage), reporting
requirements, and compliance monitoring.
• Collateral requirements in credit agreements that
specify acceptable collateral and risk-appropriate
measures and controls, including acceptable collateral
types, loan-to-value guidelines, and appropriate
collateral valuation methodologies. Standards for
asset-based loans that are part of the entire debt
structure outline expectations for the use of collateral
controls (for example, inspections, independent
valuations, and payment lockbox), other types of
collateral and account maintenance agreements, and
periodic reporting requirements; and
• Whether loan agreements provide for distribution of
ongoing financial and other relevant credit
information to all participants and investors.
Credit Analysis
Effective underwriting and management of leveraged
lending risk is highly dependent on the quality of analysis
employed during the approval process as well as ongoing
monitoring. An institution’s analysis of leveraged lending
transactions typically ensures that:
• Cash flow analyses do not rely on overly optimistic or
unsubstantiated projections of sales, margins, and
merger and acquisition synergies;
• Liquidity analyses include performance metrics
appropriate for the borrower’s industry; predictability
of the borrower’s cash flow; measurement of the
borrower’s operating cash needs; and ability to meet
debt maturities;
• Projections exhibit an adequate margin for
unanticipated merger-related integration costs;
• Projections are stress tested for one or two downside
scenarios, including a covenant breach;
• Transactions are reviewed at least quarterly to
determine variance from plan, the related risk
implications, and the accuracy of risk ratings and
accrual status;
• Enterprise and collateral valuations are independently
derived or validated outside of the origination
function, are timely, and consider potential value
erosion;
• Collateral liquidation and asset sale estimates are
based on current market conditions and trends;
• Potential collateral shortfalls are identified and
factored into risk rating and accrual decisions;
• Contingency plans anticipate changing conditions in
debt or equity markets when exposures rely on
refinancing or the issuance of new equity; and
• The borrower is adequately protected from interest
rate and foreign exchange risk.
Valuation Standards
Institutions often rely on enterprise value and other
intangibles when (1) evaluating the feasibility of a loan
request; (2) determining the debt reduction potential of
planned asset sales; (3) assessing a borrower’s ability to
access the capital markets; and, (4) estimating the strength
of a secondary source of repayment. Institutions may also
view enterprise value as a useful benchmark for assessing a
sponsor’s economic incentive to provide financial support.
Given the specialized knowledge needed for the
development of a credible enterprise valuation and the
importance of enterprise valuations in the underwriting and
ongoing risk assessment processes, enterprise valuations
should be performed by qualified persons independent of an
institution’s origination function.
There are several methods used for valuing businesses. The
most common valuation methods are assets, income, and
market. Asset valuation methods consider an enterprise’s
underlying assets in terms of its net going-concern or
liquidation value. Income valuation methods consider an
enterprise’s ongoing cash flows or earnings and apply
appropriate capitalization or discounting techniques.
Market valuation methods derive value multiples from
comparable company data or sales transactions. However,
final value estimates should be based on the method or
methods that give supportable and credible results. In many
cases, the income method is generally considered the most
reliable.
There are two common approaches employed when using
the income method. The “capitalized cash flow” method
determines the value of a company as the present value of
all future cash flows the business can generate in perpetuity.
An appropriate cash flow is determined and then divided by
a risk-adjusted capitalization rate, most commonly the
weighted average cost of capital. This method is most
appropriate when cash flows are predictable and stable. The
“discounted cash flow” method is a multiple-period
valuation model that converts a future series of cash flows
into current value by discounting those cash flows at a rate
of return (referred to as the “discount rate”) that reflects the
risk inherent therein. This method is most appropriate when
future cash flows are cyclical or variable over time. Both
income methods involve numerous assumptions, and
 
  

therefore, supporting documentation should fully explain
the evaluator’s reasoning and conclusions.
When a borrower is experiencing a financial downturn or
facing adverse market conditions, a prudent lender will
reflect those adverse conditions in its assumptions for key
variables such as cash flow, earnings, and sales multiples
when assessing enterprise value as a potential source of
repayment. Changes in the value of a borrower’s assets are
typically tested under a range of stress scenarios, including
business conditions more adverse than the base case
scenario. Stress tests of enterprise values and their
underlying assumptions are generally conducted and
documented at origination of the transaction and
periodically thereafter, incorporating the actual
performance of the borrower and any adjustments to
projections. Prudent institutions perform their own
discounted cash flow analysis to validate the enterprise
value implied by proxy measures such as multiples of cash
flow, earnings, or sales.
Enterprise value estimates derived from even the most
rigorous procedures are imprecise and ultimately may not
be realized. Therefore, institutions relying on enterprise
value or illiquid and hard-to-value collateral typically have
policies that provide for appropriate loan-to-value ratios,
discount rates, and collateral margins. Based on the nature
of an institution’s leveraged lending activities, the prudent
institution establishes limits for the proportion of individual
transactions and the total portfolio that are supported by
enterprise value. Regardless of the methodology used, the
assumptions underlying enterprise-value estimates typically
are clearly documented, well supported, and understood by
the institution’s appropriate decision-makers and risk
oversight units. Further, an institution’s valuation methods
are appropriate for the borrower’s industry and condition.
Risk Rating Leveraged Loans
The risk rating of leveraged loans involves the use of
realistic repayment assumptions to determine a borrower’s
ability to de-lever to a sustainable level within a reasonable
period of time. For example, supervisors commonly assume
that the ability to fully amortize senior secured debt or the
ability to repay at least 50 percent of total debt over a fiveto-seven year period provides evidence of adequate
repayment capacity. If the projected capacity to pay down
debt from cash flow is nominal with refinancing the only
viable option, the credit will usually be adversely rated even
if it has been recently underwritten. In cases when
leveraged loan transactions have no reasonable or realistic
prospects to de-lever, a Substandard rating is likely.
Furthermore, when assessing debt service capacity,
extensions and restructures should be scrutinized to ensure
that the institution is not merely masking repayment
capacity problems by extending or restructuring the loan.
If the primary source of repayment becomes inadequate, it
would generally be inappropriate for an institution to
consider enterprise value as a secondary source of
repayment unless that value is well supported. Evidence of
well-supported value may include binding purchase and sale
agreements with qualified third parties or thorough asset
valuations that fully consider the effect of the borrower’s
distressed circumstances and potential changes in business
and market conditions. For such borrowers, when a portion
of the loan may not be protected by pledged assets or a wellsupported enterprise value, examiners generally will rate
that portion Doubtful or Loss and place the loan on
nonaccrual status.
Risks in leveraged lending activities are considered in the
ALLL and capital adequacy analysis. For allowance
purposes, leverage exposures are typically taken into
account either through analysis of the estimated credit
losses from the discrete portfolio or as part of an overall
analysis of the portfolio utilizing the institution's internal
risk grades or other factors. At the transaction level,
exposures heavily reliant on enterprise value as a secondary
source of repayment are typically scrutinized to determine
the need for and adequacy of specific allocations.
Problem Credit Management
Individual action plans are typically formulated by
management when working with borrowers experiencing
diminished operating cash flows, depreciated collateral
values, or other significant plan variances. Weak initial
underwriting of transactions, coupled with poor structure
and limited covenants, may make problem credit
discussions and eventual restructurings more difficult for an
institution as well as result in less favorable outcomes.
A financial institution generally formulates credit policies
that define expectations for the management of adversely
rated and other high-risk borrowers whose performance
departs significantly from planned cash flows, asset sales,
collateral values, or other important targets. These policies
typically stress the need for workout plans that contain
quantifiable objectives and measureable time frames.
Actions may include working with the borrower for an
orderly resolution while preserving the institution’s
interests, sale of the credit in the secondary market, or
liquidation of collateral. Problem credits should be
reviewed regularly for risk rating accuracy, accrual status,
recognition of impairment through specific allocations, and
charge-offs.
Reporting and Analytics
Diligent financial institutions regularly monitor higher risk
credits, including leveraged loans. Monitoring includes
 
  

management’s review of comprehensive reports about the
characteristics and trends in such exposures at least
quarterly, with summaries provided to the board of
directors. Policies and procedures typically identify the
fields to be populated and captured by a financial
institution’s MIS, which then yields accurate and timely
reporting to management and the board of directors that may
include the following:
• Individual and portfolio exposures within and across
all business lines and legal vehicles, including the
pipeline;
• Risk rating distribution and migration analysis,
including maintenance of a list of those borrowers
who have been removed from the leveraged portfolio
due to improvements in their financial characteristics
and overall risk profile;
• Industry mix and maturity profile;
• Metrics derived from probabilities of default and loss
given default;
• Portfolio performance measures, including
noncompliance with covenants, restructurings,
delinquencies, non-performing amounts, and chargeoffs;
• Amount of impaired assets and the nature of
impairment, and the amount of the ALLL attributable
to leveraged lending;
• The aggregate level of policy exceptions and the
performance of that portfolio;
• Exposures by collateral type, including unsecured
transactions and those where enterprise value will be
the source of repayment for leveraged loans.
Reporting also typically considers the implications of
defaults that trigger pari-passu treatment for all
lenders and, thus, dilute the secondary support from
the sale of collateral;
• Secondary market pricing data and trading volume,
when available;
• Exposures and performance by deal sponsors. Deals
introduced by sponsors may, in some cases, be
considered exposure to related borrowers. An
institution should identify, aggregate, and monitor
potential related exposures;
• Gross and net exposures, hedge counterparty
concentrations, and policy exceptions;
• Actual versus projected distribution of the syndicated
pipeline, with regular reports of excess levels over the
hold targets for the syndication inventory. Welldesigned pipeline definitions clearly identify the type
of exposure. This includes committed exposures that
have not been accepted by the borrower, commitments
accepted but not closed, and funded and unfunded
commitments that have closed but have not been
distributed; and
• Total and segmented leveraged lending exposures,
including subordinated debt and equity holdings,
alongside established limits. Reports typically
provide a detailed and comprehensive view of global
exposures, including situations when an institution has
indirect exposure to an obligor or is holding a
previously sold position as collateral or as a reference
asset in a derivative.
Borrower and counterparty leveraged lending reporting
typically consider exposures booked in other business units
throughout the institution, including indirect exposures such
as default swaps and total return swaps, naming the
distributed paper as a covered or referenced asset or
collateral exposure through repo transactions. Additionally,
the positions in the held for sale or traded portfolios or
through structured investment vehicles owned or sponsored
by the originating institution or its subsidiaries or affiliates
are typically considered.
Deal Sponsors
A financial institution that relies on sponsor support as a
secondary source of repayment typically develops
guidelines for evaluating the qualifications of financial
sponsors and implements processes to regularly monitor a
sponsor’s financial condition. Deal sponsors may provide
valuable support to borrowers such as strategic planning,
management, and other tangible and intangible benefits.
Sponsors may also provide sources of financial support for
borrowers that fail to achieve projections. Generally, a
financial institution rates a borrower based on an analysis of
the borrower’s standalone financial condition. However, a
financial institution may consider support from a sponsor in
assigning internal risk ratings when the institution can
document the sponsor’s history of demonstrated support as
well as the economic incentive, capacity, and stated intent
to continue to support the transaction. However, even with
documented capacity and a history of support, the sponsor’s
potential contributions may not mitigate supervisory
concerns absent a documented commitment of continued
support. An evaluation of a sponsor’s financial support
typically includes the following:
• The sponsor’s historical performance in supporting its
investments, financially and otherwise;
• The sponsor’s economic incentive to support,
including the nature and amount of capital contributed
at inception;
• Documentation of degree of support (for example, a
guarantee, comfort letter, or verbal assurance);
• Consideration of the sponsor’s contractual investment
limitations;
• To the extent feasible, a periodic review of the
sponsor’s financial statements and trends, and an
 
  

analysis of its liquidity, including the ability to fund
multiple deals;
• Consideration of the sponsor’s dividend and capital
contribution practices;
• The likelihood of the sponsor supporting a particular
borrower compared to other deals in the sponsor’s
portfolio; and,
• Guidelines for evaluating the qualifications of a
sponsor and a process to regularly monitor the
sponsor’s performance.
Independent Credit Review
A financial institution with a strong and independent credit
review function demonstrates the ability to identify
portfolio risks and documented authority to escalate
inappropriate risks and other findings to their senior
management. Due to the elevated risks inherent in
leveraged lending, and depending on the relative size of a
financial institution’s leveraged lending business, there is
greater importance for the institution’s credit review
function to assess the performance of the leveraged
portfolio more frequently and in greater depth than other
segments in the loan portfolio. To be most effective, such
assessments are performed by individuals with the expertise
and experience for these types of loans and the borrower’s
industry. Portfolio reviews are generally conducted at least
annually. For many financial institutions, the risk
characteristics of leveraged portfolios, such as high reliance
on enterprise value, concentrations, adverse risk rating
trends, or portfolio performance, may dictate more frequent
reviews.
A financial institution that staffs its internal credit review
function appropriately and ensures that the function has
sufficient resources is most capable of providing timely,
independent, and accurate assessments of leveraged lending
transactions. Effective reviews evaluate the level of risk,
risk rating integrity, valuation methodologies, and the
quality of risk management. Such internal credit reviews
that review the institution’s leveraged lending practices,
policies, and procedures provide management with a
complete assessment of the leveraged lending program.
Stress Testing
A financial institution typically develops and implements
guidelines for conducting periodic portfolio stress tests on
loans originated to hold as well as loans originated to
distribute, and sensitivity analyses to quantify the potential
impact of changing economic and market conditions on its
asset quality, earnings, liquidity, and capital. The
sophistication of stress-testing practices and sensitivity
analyses are most effective when they are consistent with
the size, complexity, and risk characteristics of the
institution’s leveraged loan portfolio. To the extent a
financial institution is required to conduct enterprise-wide
stress tests, the leveraged portfolio should be included in
any such tests.
Conflicts of Interest
A financial institution typically develops appropriate
policies and procedures to address and to prevent potential
conflicts of interest when it has both equity and lending
positions. For example, an institution may be reluctant to
use an aggressive collection strategy with a problem
borrower because of the potential impact on the value of an
institution’s equity interest. A financial institution may
encounter pressure to provide financial or other privileged
client information that could benefit an affiliated equity
investor. Such conflicts also may occur when the
underwriting financial institution serves as financial advisor
to the seller and simultaneously offers financing to multiple
buyers (that is, stapled financing). Similarly, there may be
conflicting interests among the different lines of business
within a financial institution or between the financial
institution and its affiliates. When these situations occur,
potential conflicts of interest arise between the financial
institution and its customers. Effective policies and
procedures clearly define potential conflicts of interest,
identify appropriate risk management controls and
procedures, enable employees to report potential conflicts
of interest to management for action without fear of
retribution, and ensure compliance with applicable laws.
Further, an established training program for employees on
appropriate practices to follow to avoid conflicts of interest
is an effective risk management practice.
Oil and Gas Lending
Industry Overview
Oil and gas (O&G) lending is complex and highly
specialized due to factors such as global supply and
demand, geopolitical uncertainty, weather-related
disruptions, fluctuations and volatility in currency markets
(i.e. the strength of the U.S. dollar compared to global
currency markets), and changes in environmental and other
governmental policies. As such, companies and borrowers
that are directly or indirectly tied to the O&G industry
frequently experience expansion and contraction within key
operational areas of their businesses that will directly
impact their financial condition and repayment capacity.
The O&G industry has four interconnected segments:
• Upstream - exploration and production (E&P)
companies
• Midstream - transporting, treating, processing, storing,
and marketing to Upstream companies
 
  

• Downstream - refining and marketing
• Support/Services - equipment, services, or support
activities (e.g. drilling, workover units, and water
hauling services)
O&G lending to Upstream companies for E&P activities is
a specialized form of lending, and is the primary focus of
this section (see Reserve-Based Lending below). Loans to
Midstream, Downstream and Support/Service companies
are generally structured similar to other commercial loans.
In addition, Midstream companies often raise capital
through Master Limited Partnerships that are publicly
traded. The highest credit risk is typically found in
Support/Services and Upstream lending, which are more
directly affected by changes in production and commodity
prices.
Reserve-Based Lending
Loans for E&P activities are typically secured by proved
reserves and governed by a borrowing base, an arrangement
known as reserve-based lending, or RBL. Effective credit
risk management in RBL requires conservative
underwriting, appropriate structuring, experienced and
knowledgeable lending staff, and sound loan administration
practices. It is also important for the board and senior
management to consider the unique risks associated with
this type of lending when developing RBL policies and
approving and administering such loans. These risks
include, but are not limited to, credit, concentration, market
volatility/pricing, limited purpose collateral, production,
operational, legal, compliance/environmental, interest rate,
liquidity, strategic, and third-party risk.
RBL may appear similar to traditional asset based lending
(ABL), but there are notable differences. The primary
source of repayment for ABL is the orderly liquidation of
the collateral (receivables and inventory) into cash. Such
loans are typically structured with strong controls over the
collateral, such as a lock box arrangement. In contrast, the
primary source of repayment for RBL is the cash flows
derived from the extraction of O&G reserves. An
independent, third-party reserve engineering report serves
as the primary underwriting tool to estimate the future cash
stream and establish a “borrowing base,” which is a
collateral base agreed to by the borrower and lender that is
used to limit the amount of funds the lender advances the
borrower. The borrowing base is subject to periodic
redeterminations, typically semiannually, that can result in
the reduction of the borrowing base commitment when
commodity prices and reserves are declining.
Types of Reserves
Lenders should generally only consider proved reserves,
defined as having at least a 90 percent probability that the
quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the
estimate, in determining collateral value. Within the proved
reserves category, Proved Developed Producing (PDP),
Proved Developed Non-Producing (PDNP), and Proved
Undeveloped (PUD) reserves are collectively known as P1.
As described below, PDNP and PUD require capital
expenditures (CAPEX) to bring the non-producing and
undeveloped reserves online as PDP:
• PDP represents reserves that are recoverable from
existing wells with existing equipment and operating
methods that are producing at the time of the
engineering report estimate.
• PDNP reserves include both shut-in (PDSI) and
behind the pipe (PDBP) reserves, and production can
be initiated or restored with relatively low
expenditures compared to the cost of drilling a new
well.
o PDSI reserves are completion intervals that are
open, but have not started producing; were shut-in
for market conditions or pipeline connections; or
not capable of production for mechanical reasons.
o PDBP reserves are those expected to be recovered
from existing wells that require additional
completion work or future completion prior to the
start of production.
• PUD reserves are expected to be recovered only after
making future investment. These reserves have been
proved by independent engineering reports, but do not
have a well infrastructure in place.
Other categories of reserves include “probable” (P2) and
“possible” (P3). Probable reserves are relatively uncertain,
while possible reserves are considered speculative in nature.
Probable and possible reserves should not receive any value
when determining the borrowing base.
Reserve Engineering Reports
Reserve engineering reports are an estimate of the volumes
of O&G reserves that are likely to be recovered based on
reasonable assumptions regarding physical characteristics
of the reservoir, available technology, and operating
efficiencies. The significant reliance on engineering reports
in underwriting RBL facilities requires sound internal
controls over the collateral evaluation process. Reserve
reports must be objective; based on reasonable, welldocumented assumptions; and completed independently of
the loan origination and collection functions. It is important
for management to document the qualifications and
independence of the engineer, and to periodically evaluate
the production performance, which includes a comparison
of production projections to actual results.
RBL collateral value consists of a point-in-time estimate of
the present value (PV) of future net revenue (FNR) derived
 
  

from the production and sale of existing O&G reserves, net
of operating expenses, production taxes, royalties, and
CAPEX, discounted at an appropriate rate. The engineering
reports should contain sufficient information and
documentation to support the assumptions and the analysis
used to derive the forecasted cash flows and discounted PV.
Well-managed banks provide clear guidance to the engineer
at engagement regarding discount rates, pricing
assumptions, operating expense escalation rates, and riskadjustment guidelines limiting higher risk reserves. The
engineer will conduct an analysis of production reports from
the subject properties, and project estimated reserve
depletion.
Borrowing Base
The collateral base securing each facility should be
primarily comprised of PDP reserves. Inclusion of PDNP
reserves in the collateral evaluation should be supported
with sufficient documentation to demonstrate that the
borrower has the financial capacity to convert PDNP
reserves to PDP reserves by making the necessary
investments to restore or initiate production within the nearterm.
To include PUDs in the borrowing base calculation, the
borrower should have sufficient liquidity and positive Free
Cash Flow to meet operational needs, and debt service
requirements, as well as be able to fund (or obtain the
funding for) the CAPEX that would be required to convert
these undeveloped reserves into production. Potential sale
and/or marketability of the PUDs can also be considered
when evaluating collateral values, provided there is
adequate documentation of recent PUD sales.
Lenders use risk-adjustment factors to lower the value of
unseasoned producing and non-producing reserves before
applying borrowing base advance rates. It is important to
consider policy limits on production vs. non-production
reserves, the oil and gas mix, maximum production coming
from one well (single well concentration risk), and other
risk-adjustment factors. Ideally, management achieves
diversification in the geographic location of reserve fields,
and establishes limits on the lowest number of producing
wells needed to establish an acceptable borrowing base.
Typically, the advance rate for high-quality proved (P1)
reserves rarely exceed 65 percent (a typical range is 50 to
65 percent) of the PV of FNR. If the lender determines that
PDNP or PUD reserves are to be considered in the
borrowing base, these reserves should generally not exceed
25 to 35 percent of the total borrowing base. In addition,
PDNP and PUD reserves should be risk-adjusted (65 to 75
percent for PDNP and 25 to 50 percent for PUD, for
example) prior to applying the advance rate. Lenders may
apply separate risk-adjusted advance rates for each proved
reserve category in the borrowing base. During extended
periods of low or declining commodity prices, it is not
uncommon for banks to increase the risk adjustment for
PDNP and PUD reserves.
As part of the underwriting process, lending personnel
typically prepare both base-case and sensitivity-case
analyses that focus on the ability of converting the
underlying collateral into cash to repay the loan, including
an estimate of the impact that sustained adverse changes in
market conditions would have on a company’s repayment
ability. A base-case analysis uses standard assumption
scenarios and generally includes a discount to current prices
against the forward curve (projected futures pricing
estimates of the commodity). A sensitivity case analysis
subjects the O&G reserves to adverse external factors such
as lower market prices and/or higher operating expenses to
ascertain the effect on loan repayment. Full debt service
capacity (DSC) is typically analyzed using both the basecase and sensitivity-case scenarios.
Discount Rates
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires
publicly traded companies to report the value of their
reserves using a standard discount rate of 10 percent in
accordance with ASC Topic 932, Extractive Activities - Oil
and Gas. In evaluating collateral valuations for RBL
facilities, banks often utilize alternative discount rates. For
creditworthy borrowers and during more benign operating
cycles, a 9 percent discount rate is commonly used. For
higher-risk borrowers or during volatile or declining market
cycles for O&G, higher discount rates are typically used. If
a discount rate is selected that significantly differs from
generally accepted discount rates, examiners should assess
management’s documentation supporting its rationale.
Some banks may use multiple discount rates under certain
circumstances. An example may include establishing a
standard discount rate for performing credits and a higher
rate for higher risk facilities.
Price Decks
Prudent management regularly evaluates, and updates as
necessary, its pricing assumptions for RBL, commonly
referred to as the institution’s price deck. The price deck is
a forecast used to derive cash flow and collateral value
assumptions, and typically is approved by the board of
directors or a specifically designated board committee.
Pricing assumptions typically represent the most significant
variable in driving the final estimate of value, and must be
well-supported.
Each institution’s price deck typically reflects both basecase and sensitivity-case pricing scenarios. Pricing
assumptions for the sensitivity case are generally
 
  

sufficiently conservative and used to determine whether the
borrower has the financial capacity to generate adequate
cash flow to repay the debt during a prolonged low
commodity price environment. Price deck considerations
include, for example, current commodity pricing, forward
curve projections (future price considerations), cost
assumptions, discount rates, and timing of the various
reports. Management also typically documents any riskbased adjustments applied to each proved reserve category.
While the risk-adjusted base case projections will generally
be used to underwrite RBLs, consideration is also given to
the ability to repay the debt using the risk-adjusted
sensitivity case to determine potential exposure due to
adverse market price fluctuations.
Loan Structure
RBL credit facilities are typically structured as a revolving
line of credit (RLOC), a reducing revolving line of credit
(RRLOC), or an amortizing term loan, governed by a wellsupported and fully documented borrowing base. These
credit facilities generally fully amortize within the half-life
of the reserves (that is, the time in years required to produce
one-half of the total estimated recoverable production) with
repayment aligning with projected cash flows. In other
words, the term of the loans should be tied to the economic
life of the underlying asset. This is often represented as the
“reserve tail tests” that are based on the economic half-life
of the reserves or the cash flow remaining after projected
loan payout.
Loan durations should be fairly short-term and directly tied
to the economic life of the asset (generally 50 to 60 percent
of the economic life of the proved reserves or the proved
reserves’ half-life). The terms generally depend on the
projected and actual reserve production (reserve run data),
as well as the type and range of collateral (PDP, PDNP, or
PUD). A reasonable portion of the estimated revenues
should remain after the debt has fully amortized (reserve
tail). Borrowing bases should be re-determined at least
semiannually, subject to an updated reserve engineering
report.
Covenants
Appropriate use of covenants is imperative in managing
credit risk for O&G loans. Lenders typically require
financial covenants to instill discipline in the lending
relationship, including the borrower’s leverage position,
repayment capacity, and liquidity. In addition, welldesigned covenants limit cash distributions to
owners/shareholders, and include standard performance and
financial reporting requirements. Examples of commonly
used ratios/covenants for evaluating E&P companies
include Free Cash Flow (FCF), Interest Coverage, Fixed
Charge Coverage, Current Ratio, Quick Ratio, Senior
Debt/EBITDA(X), and Total Debt/EBITDA(X). The
calculation of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation,
and amortization (EBITDA) typically incorporates
maintenance CAPEX (X) due to its impact on the amount
of projected FCF that is available after debt service to
support operations.
Hedging
When used properly, hedging may be an effective tool to
help protect the borrower and the lender from sharp
commodity price declines by providing a stable cash flow
stream. E&P companies frequently use hedging
instruments such as futures contracts, swaps, collars, and
put options to reduce price risk exposure. Generally, hedges
should be limited to no more than 85 percent of projected
production volumes. Counterparties are typically limited to
reputable, financially sound companies that are approved in
accordance with the institution’s O&G loan policy. If the
hedges are taken as collateral or part of the borrowing base,
the advance rate and any limitations on the hedging position
should be documented in the loan agreement. If hedges are
sold or monetized, the proceeds of such are generally
applied to the respective debt.
Borrower and Financial Analysis
Management should have a clear understanding of the
overall financial health of the borrower that includes an
assessment of the borrower’s ability to maintain operations
through adverse market conditions. E&P companies in
sound financial condition should have strong cash flow
from reliable revenue sources and well-controlled operating
expenses. Companies should also have adequate sources of
liquidity and effective working capital management, sound
reserve development practices, well-defined criteria for
divestiture, adequate capital structure, manageable levels of
debt, and appropriate financial reporting. As part of the
overall financial analysis of the relationship, updated
engineering data should be well-documented and should
enable the lender to determine the borrower’s capacity to
service the debt. Any over-advance situation should have a
reasonable plan and timeframe to cure the over-advance.
The principals of successful E&P companies should be
experienced and have a well-documented track record of
managing through all stages of the business cycle. In good
times, company management should be able to identify,
acquire, and develop reserves profitably and in line with
expectations. During declining price cycles, company
management should be able to demonstrate the ability to
streamline operations, maintain reasonable production,
manage working capital, strategically reduce CAPEX, and
make sound divestitures to ensure repayment of debt. Bank
management should evaluate the borrower’s cost cycle,
which reflects not only the ability to generate cash flow
 
  

from production, but also the CAPEX necessary to replace
depleted reserves. Working capital management is
critically important, as delinquent payments to vendors can
result in a negative working capital position (due to
accounts payable increasing) and an increased leverage
ratio.
Financial analysis typically includes the following:
• Adequacy of operating cash flows to service existing
total debt;
• Overall compliance with financial covenants,
including borrowing base limitations as detailed in the
loan agreement;
• Reasonableness of the company’s budget assumptions
and projections;
• Comparison of borrower provided production
projections with actual results;
• Working capital, tangible net worth, and leverage
positions; and
• Impact of capital expenses and recent acquisitions.
O&G Loan Policy Guidelines
The O&G loan policy should provide sufficient guidance to
loan officers, clearly convey appropriate policy limitations
and monitoring procedures, and detail appropriate
underwriting standards and practices. The O&G policy
should clearly indicate those industry segments (Upstream,
Midstream, Downstream, and Support/Services) the board
chooses to lend to and include guidance on each of those
segments.
For institutions engaged in RBL, appropriate policies
address reserve measurement and valuation analysis,
borrowing base determinations, production history analysis,
financial statement and ratio analysis, commitment
advances, discount rates, price deck formulation, financial
covenants, steps to cure an over-advance situation, and
ALLL considerations. Specific guidelines typically cover
the following areas:
• Lending objectives, risk appetite, portfolio limits,
target market, and concentration limits;
• Methodology and requirements for monitoring O&G
markets, including pricing, supply and demand trends,
overall market trends, and industry analysis;
• Board and committee oversight over the O&G lending
and engineering departments;
• Officer and committee lending limits;
• Borrowing base calculations and risk-adjustments;
• Price deck considerations and adjustments;
• Advance rates, risk-adjusted values for PDP, PDNP,
and PUD reserves, and requirement to risk adjust the
discount value of nonproducing reserves before
applying advance rates;
• Frequency and required details of borrowing base
redeterminations and price deck revaluations;
• Requirements for independent engineering reports and
analysis thereof;
• Well concentration guidelines and maximum per
single well limits;
• Financial covenants, minimum ratio and other
financial information requirements, and review
requirements (e.g. current ratio, fixed charge
coverage, cash flow coverage, leverage ratios);
• Collateral valuation requirements, including required
remaining collateral at payout;
• Renewal and restructuring guidelines, including
nonaccrual and troubled debt restructuring
implications;
• Remedies for declining collateral or over-advanced
situations, such as Monthly Commitment Reductions,
pledge of additional reserves as collateral, and sale of
non-productive reserves;
• Minimum required insurance (including property,
liability, and environmental);
• Defined loan safety or coverage factors and/or loan
value policies, including other debt that is “paripassu” (i.e. all debts sharing equally in the production
cash flows available to amortize debt);
• Typical amortization, payout, and loan repayment
terms, including maximum terms for production
revolvers and term loans;
• Guarantor requirements;
• Hedging requirements, policies, and limitations;
• Stress-testing and sensitivity analysis and
requirements thereof; and
• Monitoring requirements for the risks inherent in
loans dependent on royalty interests in production
revenues for repayment.
Credit Risk Rating Assessment and Classification
Guidelines
An appropriate O&G loan policy also addresses specific
credit risk review procedures for the O&G portfolio and
O&G loan grading criteria. Risk rating definitions should
be clearly defined. RBL that are adequately protected by
the current sound worth and debt service capacity of the
borrower, guarantor, or underlying collateral generally will
not be adversely classified for supervisory purposes.
However, if any of the following circumstances are present,
a more in-depth and comprehensive analysis of the credit is
needed to determine whether the loan has potential or welldefined weaknesses:
 
  

• The loan balance exceeds 65 percent of the PV of
FNR of PDP, or the cash flow analysis indicates that
the loan will not amortize within the reserve half-life;
• The credit is not performing in accordance with
contractual terms (repayment of interest and
principal);
• Advance rates exceed the institution’s limits or
industry standards for proved reserves;
• Frequent over-advances occur at subsequent
borrowing base redeterminations;
• Excessive operating leverage;
• Covenant defaults;
• Delinquent payables, or other evidence of poor
working capital management;
• Significant current or likely future disruptions in
production;
• Frequent financial statement revisions or changes in
chosen accounting method;
• Maintenance or capital expenditures significantly
exceed budgeted forecasts; or
• The credit is identified by the institution as a
“distressed” credit.
Examiners are to consider all information relevant to
evaluating the prospects that the loan will be repaid,
including the borrower’s creditworthiness, the cash flow
provided by the borrower’s operation, the collateral
supporting the loan, integrity and reliability of the
engineering data, borrowing base considerations, primary
source of repayment, and any support provided by
financially responsible guarantors and co-borrowers. If the
borrower’s circumstances reveal well-defined weaknesses,
adverse classification of the loan relationship is likely
warranted. The level and severity of classification of
distressed, collateral-dependent RBLs will depend on the
quality of the underlying collateral, based on the most recent
re-determined and risk-adjusted borrowing base that is
contractually obligated to be funded.
The portion of the loan commitment(s) secured by the NPV
of total risk-adjusted proved reserves should be classified
Substandard. When the potential for loss may be mitigated
by the outcome of certain pending events, or when loss is
expected but the amount of the loss cannot be reasonably
determined, the remaining balance secured by the NPV of
total unrisked proved reserves should be classified
Doubtful. The portion of the loan commitment(s) that
exceeds 100 percent of the NPV of total unrisked proved
reserves, and is uncollectible, should be classified Loss.
These guidelines may be adjusted depending on the
borrower’s specific situation and should not replace
examiner judgment.
The following tables illustrate an example of the rating
methodology for a classified borrower. Actual pricing,
discount rates, and risk adjustment factors applied by the
institution may vary according to current market conditions
and the nature of the reserves. Examiners should closely
review the key assumptions made by the institution in
arriving at the current collateral valuation.
Example: Collateral Valuation ($ Million)
Discounted NPV at 9% and using NYMEX Strip Pricing
Valuation Hedges PDP PDNP PUD Total
Basis Proved
Unrisked $10 $50 $20 $40 $120
NPV
Risk 100% 100% 75% 50%
adjustment
factors
Risked & $10 $50 $15 $20 $95
Adjusted
NPV
Total collateral value: $95
Example: Classification ($ Million)
Borrowing base commitment on RBL is $125 million
TC Pass SM II III IV
RBL $125 $95 $25 $5
Total $125 $95 $25 $5
TC: Total Commitment SM: Special Mention
II: Substandard III: Doubtful IV: Loss
Note: The $25 million of Doubtful represents the difference
between the unrisked NPV and the risked NPV. If the
borrower's prospects for further developing PDNP and PUD
reserves to producing status are unlikely or not supported by
a pending event, this amount should be reflected as Loss.
Institutions should follow accounting principles when
determining whether a loan should be placed on nonaccrual.
Each extension should be independently evaluated to
determine whether it should be on nonaccrual; that is,
nonaccrual status should not be automatically applied to
multiple loans or extensions of credit to a single borrower if
only one loan meets the criteria for nonaccrual status.
However, multiple loans to one borrower that are structured
as pari-passu to principal and interest and supported by the
same repayment source should not be treated differently for
nonaccrual or troubled debt restructuring purposes,
regardless of collateral lien position.
Real Estate Loans
General
Real estate loans are part of the loan portfolios of almost all
commercial banks. Real estate loans include credits
advanced for the purchase of real property. However, the

 

term may also encompass extensions granted for other
purposes, but for which primary collateral protection is real
property.
The degree of risk in a real estate loan depends primarily on
the loan amount in relation to collateral value, the interest
rate, and most importantly, the borrower's ability to repay in
an orderly fashion. It is extremely important that an
institution's real estate loan policy ensure that loans are
granted with the reasonable probability the debtor will be
able and willing to meet the payment terms. Placing undue
reliance upon a property's appraised value in lieu of an
adequate initial assessment of a debtor's repayment ability
is a potentially dangerous mistake.
Historically, many banks have jeopardized their capital
structure by granting ill-considered real estate mortgage
loans. Apart from unusual, localized, adverse economic
conditions which could not have been foreseen, resulting in
a temporary or permanent decline in realty values, the
principal errors made in granting real estate loans include
inadequate regard to normal or even depressed realty values
during periods when it is in great demand thus inflating the
price structure, mortgage loan amortization, the maximum
debt load and repayment capacity of the borrower, and
failure to reasonably restrict mortgage loans on properties
for which there is limited demand.
A principal indication of a troublesome real estate loan is an
improper relationship between the amount of the loan, the
potential sale price of the property, and the availability of a
market. The potential sale price of a property may or may
not be the same as its appraised value. The current potential
sale price or liquidating value of the property is of primary
importance and the appraised value is of secondary
importance. There may be little or no current demand for
the property at its appraised value and it may have to be
disposed of at a sacrifice value.
Examiners must appraise not only individual mortgage
loans, but also the overall mortgage lending and
administration policies to ascertain the soundness of its
mortgage loan operations as well as the liquidity contained
in the account. Institutions generally establish policies that
address the following factors: the maximum amount that
may be loaned on a given property, in a given category, and
on all real estate loans; the need for appraisals (professional
judgments of the present and/or future value of the real
property) and for amortization on certain loans.
Real Estate Lending Standards
Section 18(o) of the FDI Act requires the federal banking
agencies to adopt uniform regulations prescribing standards
for loans secured by liens on real estate or made for the
purpose of financing permanent improvements to real
estate. For FDIC-supervised institutions, Part 365 of the
FDIC Rules and Regulations requires each institution to
adopt and maintain written real estate lending policies that
are consistent with sound lending principles, appropriate for
the size of the institution and the nature and scope of its
operations. These policies generally enable management to
effectively identify, measure, monitor, and control the risks
associated with real estate lending. The level and
complexity of risk-monitoring techniques for real estate
lending typically is commensurate with the level of real
estate activity and the nature and complexity of the
institution’s market. Within these general parameters, the
regulation specifically requires an institution to establish
policies that include:
• Portfolio diversification standards;
• Prudent underwriting standards including loan-tovalue limits;
• Loan administration procedures;
• Documentation, approval and reporting requirements;
and
• Procedures for monitoring real estate markets within
the institution's lending area.
These policies also should consider the Interagency
Guidelines for Real Estate Lending Policies and must be
reviewed and approved at least annually by the institution's
board of directors.
The interagency guidelines, which are an appendix to Part
365, are intended to help institutions satisfy the regulatory
requirements by outlining the general factors to consider
when developing real estate lending standards. The
guidelines suggest maximum supervisory loan-to-value
(LTV) limits for various categories of real estate loans and
explain how the agencies will monitor their use.
The Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate Lending
Policies indicate that institutions should establish their own
internal LTV limits consistent with their needs. These
internal limits should not exceed the following
recommended supervisory limits:
• 65 percent for raw land;
• 75 percent for land development;
• 80 percent for commercial, multi-family, and other
non-residential construction;
• 85 percent for construction of a 1-to-4 family
residence;
• 85 percent for improved property; and
• Owner-occupied 1-to-4 family home loans have no
suggested supervisory LTV limits. However, for any
such loan with an LTV ratio that equals or exceeds 90
percent at origination, an institution should require
 
  

appropriate credit enhancement in the form of either
mortgage insurance or readily marketable collateral.
Certain real estate loans are exempt from the supervisory
LTV limits because of other factors that significantly reduce
risk. These include loans guaranteed or insured by the
federal, state or local government as well as loans to be sold
promptly in the secondary market without recourse. A
complete list of excluded transactions is included in the
guidelines.
Because there are a number of credit factors besides LTV
limits that influence credit quality, loans that meet the
supervisory LTV limits should not automatically be
considered sound, nor should loans that exceed the
supervisory LTV limits automatically be considered high
risk. However, loans that exceed the supervisory LTV limit
should be identified in the institution's records and the
aggregate amount of these loans reported to the institution's
board of directors at least quarterly. The guidelines further
state that the aggregate amount of loans in excess of the
supervisory LTV limits should not exceed the institution's
total capital. Moreover, within that aggregate limit, the total
loans for all commercial, agricultural and multi-family
residential properties (excluding 1-to-4 family home loans)
should not exceed 30 percent of total capital.
Management and the board at each institution typically
establish an appropriate internal process for the review and
approval of loans that do not conform to internal policy
standards. The approval of any loan that is an exception to
policy typically is supported by a written justification that
clearly details all of the relevant credit factors supporting
the underwriting decision. Exception loans of a significant
size often are individually reported to the board.
Prudent management and boards monitor compliance with
internal policies and maintain reports of all exceptions to
policy. Examiners should review loan policy exception
reports to determine whether exceptions are adequately
documented and appropriate in light of all the relevant credit
considerations.
Institutions should develop policies that are clear, concise,
consistent with sound real estate lending practices, and meet
their needs. Policies should not be so complex that they
place excessive paperwork burden on the institution.
Therefore, when evaluating compliance with Part 365,
examiners should carefully consider the following:
• The size and financial condition of the institution;
• The nature and scope of the institution's real estate
lending activities;
• The quality of management and internal controls;
• The size and expertise of the lending and
administrative staff; and
• Market conditions.
The institution should not be considered in nonconformance
of the standards as a result of minor exceptions or
inconsistencies. Rather, examiners are to assess
management’s overall practices and performance when
assessing conformance with the standards.
Examination procedures for various real estate loan
categories are included in the ED Modules.
Commercial Real Estate Loans
These loans comprise a major portion of many banks' loan
portfolios. When problems exist in the real estate markets
that the institution is servicing, it is necessary for examiners
to devote additional time to the review and evaluation of
loans in these markets.
There are several warning signs that real estate markets or
projects are experiencing problems that may result in real
estate values decreasing from original appraisals or
projections. Adverse economic developments and/or an
overbuilt market can cause real estate projects and loans to
become troubled. Signs of troubled real estate markets or
projects include, but are not limited to:
• Rent concessions or sales discounts resulting in cash
flow below the level projected in the original
appraisal.
• Changes in concept or plan: for example, a
condominium project converting to an apartment
project.
• Construction delays resulting in cost overruns, which
may require renegotiation of loan terms.
• Slow leasing or lack of sustained sales activity and/or
increasing cancellations, which may result in
protracted repayment or default.
• Lack of any sound feasibility study or analysis.
• Periodic construction draws that exceed the amount
needed to cover construction costs and related
overhead expenses.
• Identified problem credits, past due and non-accrual
loans.
Real Estate Construction Loans
A well-underwritten construction loan is used to construct a
particular project within a specified period of time and
should be controlled by supervised disbursement of a
predetermined sum of money. It is generally secured by a
first mortgage or deed of trust and backed by a purchase or
takeout agreement from a financially responsible permanent
lender. Construction loans are vulnerable to a wide variety
of risks. The major risk arises from the necessity to
 
  

complete projects within specified cost and time limits. The
risk inherent in construction lending can be limited by
establishing policies which specify type and extent of
institution involvement. Such policies generally define
procedures for controlling disbursements and collateral
margins and assuring timely completion of the projects and
repayment of the institution's loans.
Before entering a construction loan agreement, it is
appropriate for the institution to investigate the character,
expertise, and financial standing of all related parties.
Documentation files would then include background
information concerning reputation, work and credit
experience, and financial statements. Such documentation
indicates that the developer, contractor, and subcontractors
have demonstrated the capacity to successfully complete the
type of project to be undertaken. The appraisal techniques
used to value a proposed construction project are essentially
the same as those used for other types of real estate. The
institution should realize that appraised collateral values are
not usually met until funds are advanced and improvements
made.
The institution, the builder, and the property owner typically
join in a written building loan agreement that specifies the
performance of each party during the entire course of
construction. Loan funds are generally disbursed based
upon either a standard payment plan or a progress payment
plan. The standard payment plan is normally used for
residential and smaller commercial construction loans and
utilizes a pre-established schedule for fixed payments at the
end of each specified stage of construction. The progress
payment plan is normally used for larger, more complex,
building projects. The plan is generally based upon monthly
disbursements totaling 90 percent of the value with 10
percent held back until the project is completed.
Although many credits advanced for real estate acquisition,
development or construction are properly considered loans
secured by real estate, other such credits are, in economic
substance, "investments in real estate ventures.” A key
feature of these transactions is that the institution as lender
plans to share in the expected residual profit from the
ultimate sale or other use of the development. These profit
sharing arrangements may take the form of equity kickers,
unusually high interest rates, a percentage of the gross rents
or net cash flow generated by the project, or some other
form of profit participation over and above a reasonable
amount for interest and related loan fees. These extensions
of credit may also include such other characteristics as
nonrecourse debt, 100 percent financing of the development
cost (including origination fees, interest payments,
construction costs, and even profit draws by the developer),
and lack of any substantive financial support from the
borrower or other guarantors. Acquisition, Development,
and Construction (ADC) arrangements that are in substance
real estate investments of the institution should be reported
accordingly.
The following are the basic types of construction lending:
• Unsecured Front Money - Unsecured front money
loans are working capital advances to a borrower who
may be engaged in a new and unproven venture.
Many bankers believe that unsecured front money
lending is not prudent unless the institution is involved
in the latter stages of construction financing. A
builder planning to start a project before construction
funding is obtained often uses front money loans. The
funds may be used to acquire or develop a building
site, eliminate title impediments, pay architect or
standby fees, and/or meet minimum working capital
requirements established by construction lenders.
Repayment often comes from the first draw against
construction financing. Unsecured front money loans
used for a developer's equity investment in a project or
to cover initial costs overruns are symptomatic of an
undercapitalized, inexperienced or inept builder.
• Land Development Loans - Land development loans
are generally secured purchase or development loans
or unsecured advances to investors and speculators.
Secured purchase or development loans are usually a
form of financing involving the purchase of land and
lot development in anticipation of further construction
or sale of the property. A land development loan
should be predicated upon a proper title search and/or
mortgage insurance. The loan amount should be
based on appraisals on an "as is" and "as completed"
basis. Projections should be accompanied by a study
explaining the effect of property improvements on the
market value of the land. There should be a sufficient
spread between the amount of the development loan
and the estimated market value to allow for
unforeseen expenses. Appropriate repayment
programs typically are structured to follow the sales or
development program. In the case of an unsecured
land development loan to investors or speculators, it is
prudent for institution management to analyze the
borrower's financial statements for sources of
repayment other than the expected return on the
property development.
• Commercial Construction Loans - Loans financing
commercial construction projects are usually
collateralized, and such collateral is generally
identical to that for commercial real estate loans.
Supporting documentation should include a recorded
mortgage or deed of trust, title insurance policy and/or
title opinions, appropriate liability insurance and other
coverages, land appraisals, and evidence that taxes
have been paid to date. Additional documents relating
 
  

to commercial construction loans include loan
agreements, takeout commitments, tri-party (buy/sell)
agreements, completion or corporate bonds, and
inspection or progress reports.
• Residential Construction Loans - Residential
construction loans may be made on a speculative basis
or as prearranged permanent financing. Smaller banks
often engage in this type of financing and the
aggregate total of individual construction loans may
equal a significant portion of their capital funds.
Prudence dictates that permanent financing be assured
in advance because the cost of such financing can
have a substantial effect on sales. Proposals to finance
speculative housing should be evaluated in accordance
with predetermined policy standards compatible with
the institution's size, technical competence of its
management, and housing needs of its service area.
The prospective borrower's reputation, experience,
and financial condition should be reviewed. The
finished project's realistic marketability in favorable
and unfavorable market conditions is also an
important consideration.
In addition to normal safeguards such as a recorded
first mortgage, acceptable appraisal, construction
agreement, draws based on progress payment plans
and inspection reports, an institution dealing with
speculative contractors should institute control
procedures tailored to the individual circumstances. A
predetermined limit on the number of unsold units to
be financed at any one time is typically included in the
loan agreement to avoid overextending the contractor's
capacity. Loans on larger residential construction
projects are usually negotiated with prearranged
permanent financing. Documentation of tract loans
frequently includes a master note allocated for the
entire project and a master deed of trust or mortgage
covering all land involved in the project. Payment of
the loan will depend largely upon the sale of the
finished homes. As each sale is completed, the
institution makes a partial release of the property
covered by its master collateral document. In addition
to making periodic inspections during the course of
construction, periodic progress reports (summary of
inventory lists maintained for each tract project)
typically are made on the entire project. A
comprehensive inventory list shows each lot number,
type of structure, release price, sales price, and loan
balance.
The exposure in any type of construction lending is that the
full value of the collateral does not exist at the time the loan
is granted. Therefore, it is important for management to
ensure funds are used properly to complete construction or
development of the property serving as collateral. If default
occurs, the institution must be in a position to either
complete the project or to salvage its construction advances.
The various mechanic's and materialmen's liens, tax liens,
and other judgments that arise in such cases are distressing
to even the most seasoned lender. Every precaution should
be taken by the lender to minimize any outside attack on the
collateral. The construction lender may not be in the
preferred position indicated by documents in the file. Laws
of some states favor the subcontractors (materialmen's liens,
etc.), although those of other states protect the construction
lender to the point of first default, provided certain legal
requirements have been met. Depending on the type and
size of project being funded, construction lending can be a
complex and fairly high-risk venture. For this reason,
institution management should ensure that it has enacted
policies and retained sufficiently trained personnel before
engaging in this type of lending.
Home Equity Loans
A home equity loan is a loan secured by the equity in a
borrower's residence. It is generally structured in one of two
ways. First, it can be structured as a traditional second
mortgage loan, wherein the borrower obtains the funds for
the full amount of the loan immediately and repays the debt
with a fixed repayment schedule. Second, the home equity
borrowing can be structured as a line of credit, with a check,
credit card, or other access to the line over its life.
The home equity line of credit has evolved into the
dominant form of home equity lending. This credit
instrument generally offers variable interest rates and
flexible repayment terms. Additional characteristics of this
product line include relatively low interest rates as
compared to other forms of consumer credit, absorption by
some banks of certain fees (origination, title search,
appraisal, recordation cost, etc.) associated with
establishing a real estate-related loan. The changes imposed
by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 relating to the income tax
deductibility of interest paid on consumer debt led to the
increased popularity of home equity lines of credit.
Home equity lending is widely considered to be a low-risk
lending activity. These loans are secured by housing assets,
the value of which historically has performed well.
Nevertheless, the possibility exists that local housing values
or household purchasing power may decline, stimulating
abandonment of the property and default on the debt secured
by the housing. Certain features of home equity loans make
them particularly susceptible to such risks. First, while the
variable rate feature of the debt reduces the interest rate risk
of the lender, the variable payment size exposes the
borrower to greater cash flow risks than would a fixed-rate
loan, everything else being equal. This, in turn, exposes the
lender to greater credit risk. Another risk is introduced by
the very nature of the home equity loan. Such loans are
 
  

generally secured by a junior lien. Thus, there is less
effective equity protection than in a first lien instrument.
Consequently, a decline in the value of the underlying
housing results in a much greater than proportional decline
in the coverage of a home equity loan. This added leverage
makes them correspondingly riskier than first mortgages.
Institutions that make these kinds of loans typically adopt
specific policies and procedures for dealing with this
product line. Management expertise in mortgage lending
and open-end credit procedures is critical to the appropriate
administration of the portfolio. Another major concern is
that borrowers will become overextended and the institution
will have to initiate foreclosure proceedings. Therefore,
underwriting standards should emphasize the borrower's
ability to service the line from cash flow rather than the sale
of the collateral, especially if the home equity line is written
on a variable rate basis. If the institution has offered a low
introductory interest rate, repayment capacity should be
analyzed at the rate that could be in effect at the conclusion
of the initial term.
Other important considerations include acceptable loan-tovalue and debt-to-income ratios, and proper credit and
collateral documentation, including adequate appraisals and
written evidence of prior lien status. Another significant
risk concerns the continued lien priority for subsequent
advances under a home equity line of credit. State law
governs the status of these subsequent advances. It is also
important that the institution's program include periodic
reviews of the borrower's financial condition and continuing
ability to repay the indebtedness.
The variation in contract characteristics of home equity debt
affects the liquidity of this form of lending. For debt to be
easily pooled and sold in the secondary market, it needs to
be fairly consistent in its credit and interest rate
characteristics. The complexity of the collateral structures,
coupled with the uncertain maturity of revolving credit,
makes home equity loans considerably less liquid than
straight first lien, fixed maturity mortgage loans.
While home equity lending is considered to be fairly lowrisk, subprime home equity loans and lending programs
exist at some banks. These programs have a higher level of
risk than traditional home equity lending programs.
Individual or pooled home equity loans that have subprime
characteristics should be analyzed using the information
provided in the subprime section of this Manual.
Agricultural Loans
Introduction
Agricultural loans are an important component of many
community institution loan portfolios. Agricultural banks
represent a material segment of commercial banks and
constitute an important portion of the group of banks over
which the FDIC has the primary federal supervisory
responsibility.
Agricultural loans are used to fund the production of crops,
fruits, vegetables, and livestock, or to fund the purchase or
refinance of capital assets such as farmland, machinery and
equipment, breeder livestock, and farm real estate
improvements (for example, facilities for the storage,
housing, and handling of grain or livestock). The
production of crops and livestock is especially vulnerable to
two risk factors that are largely outside the control of
individual lenders and borrowers: commodity prices and
weather conditions. While examiners must be alert to, and
critical of, operational and managerial weaknesses in
agricultural lending activities, they must also recognize
when the institution is taking reasonable steps to deal with
these external risk factors. Accordingly, loan restructurings
or extended repayment terms, or other constructive steps to
deal with financial difficulties faced by agricultural
borrowers because of adverse weather or commodity
conditions, will not be criticized if done in a prudent manner
and with proper risk controls and management oversight.
Examiners should recognize these constructive steps and
fairly portray them in oral and written communications
regarding examination findings. This does not imply,
however, that analytical or classification standards should
be compromised. Rather, it means that the institution’s
response to these challenges will be considered in
supervisory decisions.
Agricultural Loan Types and Maturities
Production or Operating Loans - Short-term (one year or
less) credits to finance seed, fuel, chemicals, land and
machinery rent, labor, and other costs associated with the
production of crops. Family living expenses are also
sometimes funded, at least in part, with these loans. The
primary repayment source is sale of the crops at the end of
the production season when the harvest is completed.
Feeder Livestock Loans - Short-term loans for the purchase
of, or production expenses associated with, cattle, hogs,
sheep, poultry or other livestock. When the animals attain
market weight and are sold for slaughter, the proceeds are
used to repay the debt.
Breeder Stock Loans - Intermediate-term credits (generally
three to five years) used to fund the acquisition of breeding
stock such as beef cows, sows, sheep, dairy cows, and
poultry. The primary repayment source is the proceeds
from the sale of the offspring of these stock animals, or their
milk or egg production.
Machinery and Equipment Loans - Intermediate-term loans
for the purchase of a wide array of equipment used in the
 
  

production and handling of crops and livestock. Cash flow
from farm earnings is the primary repayment source. Loans
for grain handling and storage facilities are also sometimes
included in this category, especially if the facilities are not
permanently affixed to real estate.
Farm Real Estate Acquisition Loans - Long-term credits for
the purchase of farm real estate, with cash flow from
earnings representing the primary repayment source.
Significant, permanent improvements to the real estate, such
as for livestock housing or grain storage, may also be
included within this group.
Carryover Loans - This term is used to describe two types
of agricultural credit. The first is production or feeder
livestock loans that are unable to be paid at their initial,
short-term maturity, and which are rescheduled into an
intermediate or long-term amortization. This situation
arises when weather conditions cause lower crop yields,
commodity prices are lower than anticipated, production
costs are higher than expected, or other factors result in a
shortfall in available funds for debt repayment. The second
type of carryover loan refers to already-existing term debt
whose repayment terms or maturities need to be rescheduled
because of inadequate cash flow to meet existing repayment
requirements. This need for restructuring can arise from the
same factors that lead to carryover production or feeder
livestock loans. Carryover loans are generally restructured
on an intermediate or long-term amortization, depending
upon the type of collateral provided, the borrower’s debt
service capacity from ongoing operations, the debtor’s
overall financial condition and trends, or other variables.
The restructuring may also be accompanied by acquisition
of federal guarantees through the farm credit system to
lessen risk to the institution.
Agricultural Loan Underwriting Guidelines
Many underwriting standards applicable to commercial
loans also apply to agricultural credits. The discussion of
those shared standards is therefore not repeated. Some
items, however, are especially pertinent to agricultural
credit and therefore warrant emphasis.
Financial and Other Credit Information - As with any type
of lending, sufficient information must be available so that
the institution can make informed credit decisions. Basic
information includes balance sheets, income statements,
cash flow projections, loan officer file comments, and
collateral inspections, verifications, and valuations.
Generally, financial information should be updated not less
than annually (loan officer files should be updated as needed
and document all significant meetings and events). Credit
information should be analyzed by management so that
appropriate and timely actions are taken, as necessary, to
administer the credit.
Institutions should be given some reasonable flexibility as
to the level of sophistication or comprehensiveness of the
aforementioned financial information, and the frequency
with which it is obtained, depending upon such factors as
the credit size, the type of loans involved, the financial
strength and trends of the borrower, and the economic,
climatic or other external conditions which may affect loan
repayment. It may therefore be inappropriate for the
examiner to insist that all agricultural borrowers be
supported with the full complement of balance sheets,
income statements, and other data discussed above,
regardless of the nature and amount of the credit or the
debtor’s financial strength and payment record.
Nonetheless, while recognizing some leeway is appropriate,
most of the institution’s agricultural credit lines, and all of
its larger or more significant ones, should be sufficiently
supported by the financial information mentioned.
Cash Flow Analysis - History clearly demonstrated that
significant problems can develop when banks fail to pay
sufficient attention to cash flow adequacy in underwriting
agricultural loans. While collateral coverage is important,
the primary repayment source for intermediate and longterm agricultural loans is not collateral but cash flow from
ordinary operations. This principle should be evident in the
institution’s agricultural lending policies and implemented
in its actual practices. Cash flow analysis is therefore an
important aspect of the examiner’s review of agricultural
loans. Assumptions in cash flow projections should be
reasonable and consider not only current conditions but also
the historical performance of the farming operation.
Collateral Support - Whether a loan or line of credit
warrants unsecured versus secured status in order to be
prudent and sound is a matter the examiner has to determine
based on the facts of the specific case. The decision should
generally consider such elements as the borrower’s overall
financial strength and trends, profitability, financial
leverage, degree of liquidity in asset holdings, managerial
and financial expertise, and amount and type of credit.
Nonetheless, as a general rule, intermediate and long-term
agricultural credit is typically secured, and many times
production and feeder livestock advances will also be
collateralized. Often the security takes the form of an allinclusive lien on farm personal property, such as growing
crops, machinery and equipment, livestock, and harvested
grain. A lien on real estate is customarily taken if the loan
was granted for the purchase of the property, or if the
borrower’s debts are being restructured because of debt
servicing problems. In some cases, the institution may
perfect a lien on real estate as an abundance of caution.
Examiner review of agricultural related collateral valuations
varies depending on the type of security involved. Real
estate collateral should be reviewed using normal
 
  

procedures. Feeder livestock and grain are highly liquid
commodities that are bought and sold daily in active, wellestablished markets. Their prices are widely reported in the
daily media; so, obtaining their market values is generally
easy. The market for breeder livestock may be somewhat
less liquid than feeder livestock or grain, but values are
nonetheless reasonably well known and reported through
local or regional media or auction houses. If such
information on breeding livestock is unavailable or is
considered unreliable, slaughter prices may be used as an
alternative (these slaughter prices comprise “liquidation”
rather than “going concern” values). The extent of use and
level of maintenance received significantly affect
machinery and equipment values. Determining collateral
values can therefore be very difficult as maintenance and
usage levels vary significantly. Nonetheless, values for
certain pre-owned machinery and equipment, especially
tractors, combines, and other harvesting or crop tillage
equipment, are published in specialized guides and are
based on prices paid at farm equipment dealerships or
auctions. These used machinery guides may be used as a
reasonableness check on the valuations presented on
financial statements or in management’s internal collateral
analyses.
Prudent agricultural loan underwriting also includes
systems and procedures to ensure that the institution has a
valid note receivable from the borrower and an enforceable
security interest in the collateral, should judicial collection
measures be necessary. Among other things, such systems
and procedures will confirm that promissory notes, loan
agreements, collateral assignments, and lien perfection
documents are signed by the appropriate parties and are
filed, as needed, with the appropriate state, county, and/or
municipal authorities. Flaws in the legal enforceability of
loan instruments or collateral documents will generally be
unable to be corrected if they are discovered only when the
credit is distressed and the borrower relationship strained.
Structuring - Orderly liquidation of agricultural debt, based
on an appropriate repayment schedule and a clear
understanding by the borrower of repayment expectations,
helps prevent collection problems from developing.
Amortization periods for term indebtedness should correlate
with the useful economic life of the underlying collateral
and with the operation’s debt service capacity. A toolengthy amortization period can leave the institution under
secured in the latter part of the life of the loan, when the
borrower’s financial circumstances may have changed. A
too-rapid amortization, on the other hand, can impose an
undue burden on the cash flow capacity of the farming
operation and thus lead to loan default or disruption of other
legitimate financing needs of the enterprise. It is also
generally preferable that separate loans or lines of credit be
established for each loan purpose category financed by the
institution.
Administration of Agricultural Loans
Two aspects of prudent loan administration deserve
emphasis: collateral control and renewal practices for
production loans.
Collateral Control - Production and feeder livestock loans
are sometimes referred to as self-liquidating because sale of
the crops after harvest, and of the livestock when they reach
maturity, provides a ready repayment source for these
credits. These self-liquidating benefits may be lost,
however, if the institution does not monitor and exercise
sufficient control over the disposition of the proceeds from
the sale. In agricultural lending, collateral control is mainly
accomplished by periodic on-site inspections and
verifications of the security pledged, with the results of
those inspections documented, and by implementing
procedures to ensure sales proceeds are applied to the
associated debt before those proceeds are released for other
purposes. The recommended frequency of collateral
inspections varies depending upon such things as the nature
of the farming operation, the overall credit soundness, and
the turnover rate of grain and livestock inventories.
Renewal of Production Loans - After completion of the
harvest, some farm borrowers may wish to defer repayment
of some or all of that season’s production loans, in
anticipation of higher market prices at a later point
(typically, crop prices are lower at harvest time when the
supply is greater). Such delayed crop marketing will
generally require production loan extensions or renewals.
In these situations, the institution must strike an appropriate
balance of, on the one hand, not interfering with the debtor’s
legitimate managerial decisions and marketing plans while,
at the same time, taking prudent steps to ensure its
production loans are adequately protected and repaid on an
appropriate basis. Examiners should generally not take
exception to reasonable renewals or extensions of
production loans when the following factors are favorably
resolved:
• The borrower has sufficient financial strength to
absorb market price fluctuations. Leverage and
liquidity in the balance sheet, financial statement
trends, profitability of the operation, and past
repayment performance are relevant indices.
• The borrower has sufficient financial capacity to
support both old and new production loans. That is, in
a few months subsequent to harvest, the farmer will
typically be incurring additional production debt for
the upcoming crop season.
• The institution has adequately satisfied itself of the
amount and condition of grain in inventory, so that the
renewed or extended production loans are adequately
 
  

supported. Generally, this means that a current
inspection report will be available.
Classification Guidelines for Agricultural Credit
When determining the level of risk in a specific lending
relationship, the relevant factual circumstances must be
reviewed in total. This means, among other things, that
when an agricultural loan’s primary repayment source is
jeopardized or unavailable, adverse classification is not
automatic. Rather, such factors as the borrower’s historical
performance and financial strength, overall financial
condition and trends, the value of any collateral, and other
sources of repayment must be considered. In considering
whether a given agricultural loan or line of credit should be
adversely classified, collateral margin is an important,
though not necessarily the determinative, factor. If that
margin is so overwhelming as to remove all reasonable
prospect of the institution sustaining some loss, it is
generally inappropriate to adversely classify such a loan.
Note, however, that if there is reasonable uncertainty as to
the value of that security, because of an illiquid market or
other reasons, that uncertainty can, when taken in
conjunction with other weaknesses, justify an adverse
classification of the credit, or, at minimum, may mean that
the margin in the collateral needs to be greater to offset this
uncertainty. Moreover, when assessing the adequacy of the
collateral margin, it must be remembered that deteriorating
financial trends will, if not arrested, typically result in a
shrinking of that margin. Such deterioration can also reduce
the amount of cash available for debt service needs.
That portion of an agricultural loan(s) or line of credit,
which is secured by grain, feeder livestock, and/or breeder
livestock, will generally be withheld from adverse
classification. The basis for this approach is that grain and
livestock are highly marketable and provide good protection
from credit loss. However, that high marketability also
poses potential risks that must be recognized and controlled.
The following conditions must therefore be met in order for
this provision to apply:
• The institution must take reasonable steps to verify the
existence and value of the grain and livestock. This
generally means that on-site inspections must be made
and documented. Although the circumstances of each
case must be taken into account, the general policy is
that, for the classification exclusion to apply,
inspections should have been performed not more than
90 days prior to the examination start date for feeder
livestock and grain collateral, and not more than six
months prior to the examination start date for breeder
stock collateral. Copies of invoices or bills of sale are
acceptable substitutes for inspection reports prepared
by institution management, in the case of loans for the
purchase of livestock.
• Loans secured by grain warehouse receipts are
generally excluded from adverse classification, up to
the market value of the grain represented by the
receipts.
• The amount of credit to be given for the livestock or
grain collateral should be based on the daily,
published, market value as of the examination start
date, less marketing and transportation costs, feed and
veterinary expenses (to the extent determinable), and,
if material in amount, the accrued interest associated
with the loan(s). Current market values for breeder
stock may be derived from local or regional
newspapers, area auction barns, or other sources
considered reliable. If such valuations for breeding
livestock cannot be obtained, the animals’ slaughter
values may be used.
• The institution must have satisfactory practices for
controlling sales proceeds when the borrower sells
livestock and feed and grain.
• The institution must have a properly perfected and
enforceable security interest in the assets in question.
Examiners should exercise great caution in granting the
grain and livestock exclusion from adverse classification in
those instances where the borrower is highly leveraged, or
where the debtor’s basic operational viability is seriously in
question, or if the institution is in an under-secured position.
The issue of control over proceeds becomes extremely
critical in such highly distressed credit situations. If the
livestock and grain exclusion from adverse classification is
not given in a particular case, institution management
should be informed of the reasons why.
With the above principles, requirements, and standards in
mind, the general guidelines for determining adverse
classification for agricultural loans are as follows, listed by
loan type.
Feeder Livestock Loans - The self-liquidating nature of
these credits means that they are generally not subject to
adverse classification. However, declines in livestock
prices, increases in production costs, or other unanticipated
developments may result in the revenues from the sale of
the livestock not being adequate to fully repay the loans.
Adverse classification may then be appropriate, depending
upon the support of secondary repayment sources and
collateral, and the borrower’s overall financial condition
and trends.
Production Loans - These loans are generally not subject to
adverse classification if the debtor has good liquidity and/or
significant fixed asset equities, or if the cash flow
information suggests that current year’s operations should
be sufficient to repay the advances. The examiner should
also take into account any governmental support programs
or federal crop insurance benefits from which the borrower
 
  

may benefit. If cash flow from ongoing operations appears
insufficient to repay production loans, adverse classification
may be in order, depending upon the secondary repayment
sources and collateral, and the borrower’s overall financial
condition and trends.
Breeder Stock Loans - These loans are generally not
adversely classified if they are adequately secured by the
livestock and if the term debt payments are being met
through the sale of offspring (or milk and eggs in the case
of dairy and poultry operations). If one or both of these
conditions is not met, adverse classification may be in order,
depending upon the support of secondary repayment
sources and collateral, and the borrower’s overall financial
condition and trends.
Machinery and Equipment Loans - Loans for the acquisition
of machinery and equipment will generally not be subject to
adverse classification if they are adequately secured,
structured on an appropriate amortization program (see
above), and are paying as agreed. Farm machinery and
equipment is often the second largest class of agricultural
collateral, hence its existence, general state of repair, and
valuation are generally verified and documented during the
institution’s periodic on-site inspections of the borrower’s
operation. Funding for the payments on machinery and
equipment loans sometimes comes, at least in part, from
other loans provided by the institution, especially
production loans. When this is the case, the question arises
whether the payments are truly being “made as agreed.” For
examination purposes, such loans will be considered to be
paying as agreed if cash flow projections, payment history,
or other available information, suggests there is sufficient
capacity to fully repay the production loans when they
mature at the end of the current production cycle. If the
machinery and equipment loan is not adequately secured, or
if the payments are not being made as agreed, adverse
classification should be considered.
Carryover Debt - Carryover debt results from the debtor’s
inability to generate sufficient cash flow to service the
obligation as it is currently structured. It therefore tends to
contain a greater degree of credit risk and must receive close
analysis by the examiner. When carryover debt arises, the
institution should determine the basic viability of the
borrower’s operation, so that an informed decision can be
made on whether debt restructuring is appropriate. It will
thus be useful for institution management to know how the
carryover debt came about: Did it result from the obligor’s
financial, operational or other managerial weaknesses; from
inappropriate credit administration on the institution’s part,
such as over lending or improper debt structuring; from
external events such as adverse weather conditions that
affected crop yields; or from other causes? In many
instances, it will be in the long-term best interests of both
the institution and the debtor to restructure the obligations.
The restructured obligation should generally be rescheduled
on a term basis and require clearly identified collateral,
amortization period, and payment amounts. The
amortization period may be intermediate or long term
depending upon the useful economic life of the available
collateral, and on realistic projections of the operation’s
payment capacity.
There are no hard and fast rules on whether carryover debt
should be adversely classified, but the decision should
generally consider the following: borrower’s overall
financial condition and trends, especially financial leverage
(often measured in farm debtors with the debt-to-assets
ratio); profitability levels, trends, and prospects; historical
repayment performance; the amount of carryover debt
relative to the operation’s size; realistic projections of debt
service capacity; and the support provided by secondary
collateral. Accordingly, carryover loans to borrowers who
are moderately to highly leveraged, who have a history of
weak or no profitability and barely sufficient cash flow
projections, as well as an adequate but slim collateral
margin, will generally be adversely classified, at least until
it is demonstrated through actual repayment performance
that there is adequate capacity to service the rescheduled
obligation. The classification severity will normally depend
upon the collateral position. At the other extreme are cases
where the customer remains fundamentally healthy
financially, generates good profitability and ample cash
flow, and who provides a comfortable margin in the security
pledged. Carryover loans to this group of borrowers will
not ordinarily be adversely classified.
Installment Loans
An installment loan portfolio is usually comprised of a large
number of small loans scheduled to be amortized over a
specific period. Most installment loans are made directly
for consumer purchases, but business loans granted for the
purchase of heavy equipment or industrial vehicles may also
be included. In addition, the department may grant indirect
loans for the purchase of consumer goods.
The examiner's emphasis in reviewing the installment loan
department should be on the overall procedures, policies
and credit qualities. The goal should not be limited to
identifying current portfolio problems, but should include
potential future problems that may result from ineffective
policies, unfavorable trends, potentially dangerous
concentrations, or nonadherence to established policies.
Direct installment lending policies typically address the
following factors: loan applications and credit checks; terms
in relation to collateral; collateral margins; perfection of
liens; extensions, renewals and rewrites; delinquency
notification and follow-up; and charge-offs and collections.
For indirect lending, the policy typically addresses direct
payment to the institution versus payment to the dealer,
 
  

acquisition of dealer financial information, possible upper
limits for any one dealer's paper, other standards governing
acceptance of dealer paper, and dealer reserves and chargebacks.
Lease Accounting
ASC Topic 840, Leases, is the current lease accounting
standard for non-public business entities and entities that
have not adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases. ASC Topic 842
is effective for public business entities (as defined in U.S.
GAAP) and will become effective for banks that are not
public business entities, for fiscal years beginning after
December 15, 2021, and interim reporting periods within
fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. As such, a
calendar year end non-public business entity’s first reporting
period will be December 31, 2022. Early adoption is
permitted.
Direct Lease Financing
Leasing is a recognized form of term debt financing for
fixed assets. While leases differ from loans in some
respects, they are similar from a credit viewpoint because
the basic considerations are cash flow, repayment capacity,
credit history, management and projections of future
operations. Additional considerations for a lease
transaction are the property type and its marketability in the
event of default or lease termination. Those latter
considerations do not radically alter the manner in which an
examiner evaluates collateral for a lease. The assumption is
that the lessee/borrower will generate sufficient funds to
liquidate the lease/debt. Sale of leased property/collateral
remains a secondary repayment source and, except for the
estimated residual value at the expiration of the lease, will
not, in most cases, become a factor in liquidating the
advance. When the institution is requested to purchase
property of significant value for lease, it may issue a
commitment to lease, describing the property, indicating
cost, and generally outlining the lease terms. After all terms
in the lease transaction are resolved by negotiation between
the institution and its customer, an order is usually written
requesting the institution to purchase the property. Upon
receipt of that order, the institution purchases the property
requested and arranges for delivery and, if necessary,
installation. A lease contract is drawn incorporating all the
points covered in the commitment letter, as well as the rights
of the institution and lessee in the event of default. The
lease contract is generally signed simultaneously with the
signing of the order to purchase and the agreement to lease.
Lessor Accounting under ASC Topic 840
The types of assets that may be leased are numerous, and
the accounting for direct leasing is a complex subject which
is discussed in detail in ASC Topic 840, Leases. Familiarity
with ASC Topic 840 is a prerequisite for the management
of any institution engaging in or planning to engage in direct
lease financing. The following terms are commonly
encountered in direct lease financing:
• Net Lease, one in which the institution is not directly
or indirectly obligated to assume the expenses of
maintaining the equipment. This restriction does not
prohibit the institution from paying delivery and set up
charges on the property.
• Full Payout Lease, one for which the institution
expects to realize both the return of its full investment
and the cost of financing the property over the term of
the lease. This payout can come from rentals,
estimated tax benefits, and estimated residual value of
the property.
• Leveraged Lease, in which the institution as lessor
purchases and becomes the equipment owner by
providing a relatively small percentage (20-40%) of
the capital needed. Balance of the funds is borrowed
by the lessor from long-term lenders who hold a first
lien on the equipment and assignments of the lease
and lease rental payments. This specialized and
complex form of leasing is prompted mainly by a
desire on the part of the lessor to shelter income from
taxation. Creditworthiness of the lessee is paramount
and the general rule is an institution should not enter
into a leveraged lease transaction with any party to
whom it would not normally extend unsecured credit.
• Rentals, which include only those payments
reasonably anticipated by the institution at the time the
lease is executed.
Lessor Accounting under ASC Topic 842
ASC Topic 842, Leases does not fundamentally change
lessor accounting; however, it aligns terminology between
lessee and lessor accounting and brings key aspects of lessor
accounting into alignment with the FASB’s new revenue
recognition guidance in ASC Topic 606. As a result, the
classification difference between direct financing leases and
sales-type leases for lessors moves from a risk-and-rewards
principle to a transfer of control principle. As such, an
institution as lessor is required to classify a lease as a salestype, direct financing, or operating leases. Additionally,
there is no longer a distinction in the treatment of real estate
and non-real estate leases by lessors.
Leases classified as leveraged leases prior to the adoption of
ASC Topic 842 may continue to be accounted for under
ASC Topic 840 unless subsequently modified. ASC Topic
842 eliminates leveraged lease accounting for leases that
commence after an institution adopts the new accounting
standard.
 
  

For more information refer to the Call Report Glossary for
the accounting for leases or ASC Topic 842.
Examiner Consideration
Examiners should determine whether bank management
carefully evaluates all lease variables, including the
estimate of the residual value. Institutions may be able to
realize unwarranted lease income in the early years of a
contract by manipulating the lease variables. In addition, an
institution can offer the lessee a lower payment by assuming
an artificially high residual value during the initial
structuring of the lease. But this technique may present the
institution with serious long-term problems because of the
reliance on speculative or nonexistent residual values.
Often, lease contracts contain an option permitting the
lessee to continue use of the property at the end of the
original term, working capital restrictions and other
restrictions or requirements similar to debt agreements and
lease termination penalties. Each lease is an individual
contract written to fulfill the lessee's needs. Consequently,
there may be many variations of each of the above
provisions. However, the underlying factors remain the
same: there is a definite contractual understanding of the
positive right to use the property for a specific period of
time, and required payments are irrevocable.
Examination procedures for reviewing lease financing
activities are included in the ED Modules in the Loan
References section.
Floor Plan Loans
Floor plan (wholesale) lending is a form of retail goods
inventory financing in which each loan advance is made
against a specific piece of collateral. As each piece of
collateral is sold by the dealer, the loan advance against that
piece of collateral is repaid. Items commonly subject to
floor plan debt are automobiles, home appliances, furniture,
television and stereophonic equipment, boats, mobile
homes and other types of merchandise usually sold under a
sales finance contract. Drafting agreements are a relatively
common approach utilized in conjunction with floor plan
financing. Under this arrangement, the institution
establishes a line of credit for the borrower and authorizes
the good’s manufacturer to draw drafts on the institution in
payment for goods shipped. The institution agrees to honor
these drafts, assuming proper documentation (such as
invoices, manufacturer's statement of origin, etc.) is
provided. The method facilitates inventory purchases by, in
effect, guaranteeing payment to the manufacturer for
merchandise supplied. Floor plan loans involve all the basic
risks inherent in any form of inventory financing. However,
because of the banker's inability to exercise full control over
the floored items, the exposure to loss may be greater than
in other similar types of financing. Most dealers have
minimal capital bases relative to debt. As a result, close and
frequent review of the dealer's financial information is
necessary. As with all inventory financing, collateral value
is of prime importance. Control requires the institution to
determine the collateral value at the time the loan is placed
on the books, frequently inspect the collateral to determine
its condition, and impose a curtailment requirement
sufficient to keep collateral value in line with loan balances.
Handling procedures for floor plan lines will vary greatly
depending on institution size and location, dealer size and
the type of merchandise being financed. In many cases, the
term "trust receipt" is used to describe the debt instrument
existing between the institution and the dealer. Trust
receipts may result from drafting agreements between an
institution and a manufacturer for the benefit of a dealer. In
other instances, the dealer may order inventory, bring titles
or invoices to the institution, and then obtain a loan secured
or to be secured by the inventory. Some banks may use
master debt instruments, and others may use a trust receipt
or note for each piece of inventory. The method of
perfecting a security interest also varies from state to state.
The important point is that an institution enacts realistic
handling policies and ensures that its collateral position is
properly protected.
Examination procedures and examiner considerations for
reviewing floor plan lending activities are included in the
ED Modules in the Loan References section.
Check Credit and Credit Card Loans
Check credit is defined as the granting of unsecured
revolving lines of credit to individuals or businesses. Check
credit services are provided by the overdraft system, cash
reserve system, and special draft system. The most common
is the overdraft system. In that method, a transfer is made
from a pre-established line of credit to a customer's demand
deposit account when a check which would cause an
overdraft position is presented. Transfers normally are
made in stated increments, up to the maximum line of credit
approved by the institution, and the customer is notified that
the funds have been transferred. In a cash reserve system,
customers must request that the institution transfer funds
from their pre-established line of credit to their demand
deposit account before negotiating a check against them. A
special draft system involves the customer negotiating a
special check drawn directly against a pre-established line
of credit. In that method, demand deposit accounts are not
affected. In all three systems, the institution periodically
provides its check credit customers with a statement of
account activity. Required minimum payments are
computed as a fraction of the balance of the account on the
cycle date and may be made by automatic charges to a
demand deposit account.
 
  

Most institution credit card plans are similar. The
institution solicits retail merchants, service organizations
and others who agree to accept a credit card in lieu of cash
for sales or services rendered. The parties also agree to a
discount percentage of each sales draft and a maximum
dollar amount per transaction. Amounts exceeding that
limit require prior approval by the institution. Merchants
also may be assessed a fee for imprinters or promotional
materials. The merchant deposits the institution credit card
sales draft at the institution and receives immediate credit
for the discounted amount. The institution assumes the
credit risk and charges the nonrecourse sales draft to the
individual customer's credit card account. Monthly
statements are rendered by the institution to the customer
who may elect to remit the entire amount, generally without
service charge, or pay in monthly installments, with an
additional percentage charged on the outstanding balance
each month. A cardholder also may obtain cash advances
from the institution or dispensing machines. Those
advances accrue interest from the transaction date. An
institution may be involved in a credit card plan in three
ways:
• Agent Bank, which receives credit card applications
from customers and sales drafts from merchants and
forwards such documents to banks described below,
and is accountable for such documents during the
process of receiving and forwarding.
• Sublicensee Bank, which maintains accountability for
credit card loans and merchant's accounts; may
maintain its own center for processing payments and
drafts; and may maintain facilities for embossing
credit cards.
• Licensee Bank, which is the same as sublicensee
institution, but in addition may perform transaction
processing and credit card embossing services for
sublicensee banks, and also acts as a regional or
national clearinghouse for sublicensee banks.
Check credit and credit card loan policies typically address
procedures for careful screening of account applicants;
establishment of internal controls to prevent interception of
cards before delivery, merchants from obtaining control of
cards, or customers from making fraudulent use of lost or
stolen card; frequent review of delinquent accounts,
accounts where payments are made by drawing on reserves,
and accounts with steady usage; delinquency notification
procedures; guidelines for realistic charge-offs; removal of
accounts from delinquent status (curing) through
performance not requiring a catch-up of delinquent
principal; and provisions that preclude automatic reissuance
of expired cards to obligors with charged-off balances or an
otherwise unsatisfactory credit history with the institution.
Examination procedures for reviewing these activities are
included in the ED Modules. Also, the FDIC has separate
manuals on Credit Card Specialty Bank Examination
Guidelines and Credit Card Securitization Activities.
Credit Card-related Merchant Activities
Merchant credit card activities basically involve the
acceptance of credit card sales drafts for clearing by a
financial institution (clearing institution). For the clearing
institution, these activities are generally characterized by
thin profit margins amidst high transactional and sales
volumes. Typically, a merchant's customer will charge an
item on a credit card, and the clearing institution will give
credit to the merchant's account. Should the customer
dispute a charge transaction, the clearing institution is
obligated to honor the customer's legitimate request to
reverse the transaction. The Clearing Institution must then
seek reimbursement from the merchant. Problems arise
when the merchant is not creditworthy and is unable, or
unwilling, to reimburse the clearing institution. In these
instances, the clearing institution will incur a loss.
Examiners should review for the existence of any such
contingent liabilities.
To avoid losses and to ensure the safe and profitable
operation of a clearing institution's credit card activities, the
merchants with whom it contracts for clearing services
should be financially sound and honestly operated. To this
end, safe and sound merchant credit card activities include
clear and detailed acceptance standards for merchants, such
as the following:
• Scrutinizing prospective merchants using the same
care and diligence used in evaluating prospective
borrowers.
• Closely monitoring merchants with controls to ensure
that early warning signs are recognized so that
problem merchants can be removed from a clearing
institution's program promptly to minimize loss
exposure.
• Establishing an account administration program that
incorporates periodic reviews of merchants' financial
statements and business activities in cases of
merchants clearing large dollar volumes.
• Establishing an internal periodic reporting system of
merchant account activities regardless of the amount
or number of transactions cleared, with these reports
reviewed for irregularities so problematic merchant
activity is identified quickly.
• Developing policies that follow the guidelines
established by the card issuing networks.
Another possible problem with merchant activities involves
clearing institutions that sometimes engage the services of
 
  

agents, such as an independent sales organization (ISO).
ISOs solicit merchants' credit card transactions for a
clearing institution. In some cases, the ISOs actually
contract with merchants on behalf of clearing institutions.
Some of these contracts are entered into by the ISOs without
the review and approval of the clearing institutions. At
times, clearing institutions unfortunately rely too much on
the ISOs to oversee account activity. In some cases,
clearing institutions have permitted ISOs to contract with
disreputable merchants. Because of the poor condition of
the merchant, or ISO, or both, these clearing institutions can
ultimately incur heavy losses.
A financial institution with credit card clearing activities
typically develops its own internal controls and procedures
to ensure sound agent selection standards before engaging
an ISO. ISOs that seek to be compensated solely on the
basis of the volume of signed-up merchants should be
carefully scrutinized. A clearing institution should
adequately supervise the ISO's activities, just as the
institution would supervise any third party engaged to
perform services for any aspect of the institution's
operations. Also, institutions typically and appropriately
reserve the right to ratify or reject any merchant contract that
is initiated by an ISO.
Examination procedures for reviewing credit card related
merchant activities are included in the ED Modules in the
Supplemental Modules Section and in the Credit Card
Activities Manual.

OTHER CREDIT ISSUES
Appraisals
Appraisals are professional judgments of the market value
of real property. Three basic valuation approaches are used
by professional appraisers in estimating the market value of
real property; the cost approach, the market data or direct
sales comparison approach, and the income approach. The
principles governing the three approaches are widely known
in the appraisal field and are referenced in parallel
regulations issued by each of the federal banking agencies.
When evaluating collateral, the three valuation approaches
are not equally appropriate.
• Cost Approach - In this approach, the appraiser
estimates the reproduction cost of the building and
improvements, deducts estimated depreciation, and
adds the value of the land. The cost approach is
particularly helpful when reviewing draws on
construction loans. However, as the property
increases in age, both reproduction cost and
depreciation become more difficult to estimate.
Except for special purpose facilities, the cost approach
is usually inappropriate in a troubled real estate
market because construction costs for a new facility
normally exceed the market value of existing
comparable properties.
• Market Data or Direct Sales Comparison
Approach - This approach examines the price of
similar properties that have sold recently in the local
market, estimating the value of the subject property
based on the comparable properties' selling prices. It
is very important that the characteristics of the
observed transactions be similar in terms of market
location, financing terms, property condition and use,
timing, and transaction costs. The market approach
generally is used in valuing owner-occupied
residential property because comparable sales data is
typically available. When adequate sales data is
available, an analyst generally will give the most
weight to this type of estimate. Often, however, the
available sales data for commercial properties is not
sufficient to justify a conclusion.
• The Income Approach - The economic value of an
income-producing property is the discounted value of
the future net operating income stream, including any
"reversion" value of property when sold. If
competitive markets are working perfectly, the
observed sales price should be equal to this value. For
unique properties or in depressed markets, value based
on a comparable sales approach may be either
unavailable or distorted. In such cases, the income
approach is usually the appropriate method for valuing
the property. The income approach converts all
expected future net operating income into present
value terms. When market conditions are stable and
no unusual patterns of future rents and occupancy
rates are expected, the direct capitalization method is
often used to estimate the present value of future
income streams. For troubled properties, however, the
more explicit discounted cash flow (net present value)
method is more typically utilized for analytical
purposes. In the rent method, a time frame for
achieving a "stabilized", or normal, occupancy and
rent level is projected. Each year's net operating
income during that period is discounted to arrive at
present value of expected future cash flows. The
property's anticipated sales value at the end of the
period until stabilization (its terminal or reversion
value) is then estimated. The reversion value
represents the capitalization of all future income
streams of the property after the projected occupancy
level is achieved. The terminal or reversion value is
then discounted to its present value and added to the
discounted income stream to arrive at the total present
market value of the property.
Valuation of Troubled Income-Producing Properties
 
  

When an income property is experiencing financial
difficulties due to general market conditions or due to its
own characteristics, data on comparable property sales is
often difficult to obtain. Troubled properties may be hard
to market, and normal financing arrangements may not be
available. Moreover, forced and liquidation sales can
dominate market activity. When the use of comparables is
not feasible (which is often the case for commercial
properties), the net present value of the most reasonable
expectation of the property's income-producing capacity -
not just in today's market but over time - offers the most
appropriate method of valuation in the supervisory process.
Estimates of the property's value should be based upon
reasonable and supportable projections of the determinants
of future net operating income: rents (or sales), expenses,
and rates of occupancy. The primary considerations for
these projections include historical levels and trends, the
current market performance achieved by the subject and
similar properties, and economically feasible and defensible
projections of future demand and supply conditions. If
current market activity is dominated by a limited number of
transactions or liquidation sales, high capitalization and
discount rates implied by such transactions should not be
used. Rather, analysts should use rates that reflect market
conditions that are neither highly speculative nor depressed.
Appraisal Regulation
Title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
Enforcement Act of 1989 requires that appraisals prepared
by certified or licensed appraisers be obtained in support of
real estate lending and mandates that the federal financial
institutions regulatory agencies adopt regulations regarding
the preparation and use of appraisals in certain real estate
related transactions by financial institutions under their
jurisdiction. In addition, Title XI created the Appraisal
Subcommittee of the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council (FFIEC) to provide oversight of the
real estate appraisal process as it relates to federally related
real estate transactions. The Appraisal Subcommittee is
composed of six members, each of whom is designated by
the head of their respective agencies. Each of the five
financial institution regulatory agencies which comprise the
FFIEC and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development are represented on the Appraisal
Subcommittee. A responsibility of the Appraisal
Subcommittee is to monitor the state certification and
licensing of appraisers. It has the authority to disapprove a
state appraiser regulatory program, thereby disqualifying
the state's licensed and certified appraisers from conducting
appraisals for federally related transactions. The Appraisal
Subcommittee also has the authority to temporarily waive
the credential requirement if certain criteria are met. The
Appraisal Subcommittee gets its funding by charging state
certified and licensed appraisers an annual registration fee.
The fee income is used to cover Appraisal Subcommittee
administrative expenses and to provide grants to the
Appraisal Foundation.
Formed in 1987, the Appraisal Foundation was established
as a private not for profit corporation bringing together
interested parties within the appraisal industry, as well as
users of appraiser services, to promote professional
standards within the appraisal industry. The Foundation
sponsors two independent boards referred to in Title XI, The
Appraiser Qualifications Board (AQB) and The Appraisal
Standards Board (ASB). Title XI specifies that the
minimum standards for state appraiser certification are to be
the criteria for certification issued by the AQB. Title XI
does not set specific criteria for the licensed classification.
These are individually determined by each state.
Additionally, Title XI requires that the appraisal standards
prescribed by the federal agencies, at a minimum, must be
the appraisal standards promulgated by the ASB. The ASB
has issued The Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal
Practice (USPAP) which set the appraisal industry standards
for conducting an appraisal of real estate. To the appraisal
industry, USPAP is analogous to generally accepted
accounting principles for the accounting profession.
In conformance with Title XI, Part 323 of the FDIC
regulations identifies which real estate related transactions
require an appraisal by a certified or licensed appraiser and
establishes minimum standards for performing appraisals.
Substantially similar regulations have been adopted by each
of the federal financial institutions regulatory agencies.
Real estate-related transactions include real estate loans,
mortgage-backed securities, institution premises, real estate
investments, and other real estate owned. All real estaterelated transactions by FDIC-insured institutions not
specifically exempt are, by definition, "federally related
transactions" subject to the requirements of the regulation.
Exempt real estate-related transactions include:
(1) The transaction is a residential real estate
transaction that has a transaction value of $400,000
or less;
(2) A lien on real estate has been taken as collateral in an
abundance of caution;
(3) The transaction is not secured by real estate;
(4) A lien on real estate has been taken for purposes other
than the real estate’s value;
(5) The transaction is a business loan that: (i) has a
transaction value of $1 million or less; and (ii) is not
dependent on the sale of, or rental income derived
from, real estate as the primary source of repayment;
(6) A lease of real estate is entered into, unless the lease is
the economic equivalent of a purchase or sale of the
leased real estate;
 
  

(7) The transaction involves an existing extension of
credit at the lending institution, provided that: (i)
There has been no obvious and material change in the
market conditions or physical aspects of the property
that threatens the adequacy of the institution’s real
estate collateral protection after the transaction, even
with the advancement of new monies; or (ii) There is
no advancement of new monies, other than funds
necessary to cover reasonable closing costs;
(8) The transaction involves the purchase, sale,
investment in, exchange of, or extension of credit
secured by, a loan or interest in a loan, pooled loans,
or interests in real property, including mortgagebacked securities, and each loan or interest in a loan,
pooled loan, or real property interest met FDIC
regulatory requirements for appraisals at the time of
origination;
(9) The transaction is wholly or partially insured or
guaranteed by a United States government agency or
United States government sponsored agency;
(10)The transaction either; (i) Qualifies for sale to a
United States government agency or United States
government sponsored agency; or (ii) Involves a
residential real estate transaction in which the
appraisal conforms to the Federal National Mortgage
Association or Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation appraisal standards applicable to that
category of real estate;
(11)The regulated institution is acting in a fiduciary
capacity and is not required to obtain an appraisal
under other law;
(12)The FDIC determines that the services of an appraiser
are not necessary in order to protect federal financial
and public policy interests in real estate-related
financial transaction or to protect the safety and
soundness of the institution;
(13)The transaction is a commercial real estate transaction
that has a transaction value of $500,000 or less; or
(14)The transaction is exempted from the appraisal
requirement pursuant to the rural residential
exemption under 12 U.S.C. 3356.
The regulation also requires an institution to obtain an
appropriate evaluation of the real property collateral that
is consistent with safe and sound banking practices for a
transaction that does not require the services of a state
certified or licensed appraiser per exemption (1), (5), (7),
(13), or (14).
Section 323.4 establishes minimum standards for all
appraisals in connection with federally related transactions.
Appraisals performed in conformance with the regulation
must conform to the requirements of the USPAP and certain
other listed standards. The applicable sections of USPAP
are the Preamble (ethics and competency), Standard 1
(appraisal techniques), Standard 2 (report content), and
Standard 3 (review procedures). USPAP Standards 4
through 10 concerning appraisal services and appraising
personal property do not apply to federally related
transactions. An appraisal satisfies the regulation if it is
performed in accordance with all of its provisions and it is
still current and meaningful. The regulation also requires
that the appraisal report contain the appraiser's certification
that the appraisal was prepared in conformance with
USPAP.
In addition, the regulation requires appraisals for federally
related transactions to be subject to appropriate review for
compliance with USPAP. Specific review procedures in an
institution's written appraisal program that produce some
form of documented evidence would facilitate meeting this
regulatory requirement. Procedures for maintaining some
form of documented evidence of the review of other
appraisals help ensure those appraisals facilitate making
informed lending decisions. Examiners should note that
such evidence could take the form of an appraisal checklist
that includes the signature of an appropriately trained
external person or an internal staff member, indicates the
appraisal was reviewed, and finds that all USPAP standards
were met. An effective appraisal program’s review
escalation procedures will facilitate internal staff’s ability to
take appropriate action to address appraisals that do not
comply with USPAP.
Adherence to the appraisal regulations should be part of the
examiner's overall review of the lending function. When
analyzing individual transactions, examiners should review
appraisal reports to determine the institution's conformity to
its own internal appraisal policies and for compliance with
the regulation. Examiners may need to conduct a more
detailed review if the appraisal does not have sufficient
information, does not explain assumptions, is not logical, or
has other major deficiencies that cast doubt as to the validity
of its opinion of value. Examination procedures regarding
appraisal reviews are included in the Examination
Documentation Modules.
Loans in a pool such as an investment in mortgage- backed
securities or collateralized mortgage obligations should
have some documented assurance that each loan in the pool
has an appraisal in accordance with the regulation.
Appropriate evidence could include an issuer's certification
of compliance.
All apparent violations of Part 323 should be listed in the
examination report in the usual manner. Significant
systemic failures to meet standards and procedures could
call for formal corrective measures.
Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines
 
  

The Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines dated
December 2, 2010 address supervisory matters relating to
real estate-related financial transactions and provide
guidance to examining personnel and federally regulated
institutions about prudent appraisal and evaluation policies,
procedures, practices, and standards that are consistent with
the appraisal regulation.
An institution's real estate appraisal and evaluation policies
and procedures will be reviewed as part of the examination
of the institution's overall real estate-related activities. An
institution's policies and procedures typically are
incorporated into an effective appraisal and evaluation
program. Examiners will consider the institution's size and
the nature of its real estate-related activities when assessing
the appropriateness of its program.
When analyzing individual transactions, examiners should
review an appraisal or evaluation to determine whether the
methods, assumptions, and findings are reasonable and
comply with the agencies' appraisal regulations and the
institution’s internal policies. Examiners also will review
the steps taken by an institution to ensure that the
individuals who perform its appraisals and evaluations are
qualified and are not subject to conflicts of interest.
Institutions that fail to maintain a sound appraisal or
evaluation program or to comply with the agencies'
appraisal regulations will be cited in examination reports
and may be criticized for unsafe and unsound banking
practices. Deficiencies will require corrective action.
Appraisal and Evaluation Program - An institution's board
of directors is responsible for reviewing and adopting
policies and procedures that establish an effective real estate
appraisal and evaluation program. Effective programs:
• Establish selection criteria and procedures to evaluate
and monitor the ongoing performance of individuals
who perform appraisals or evaluations;
• Provide for the independence of the person
performing appraisals or evaluations;
• Identify the appropriate appraisal for various lending
transactions;
• Establish criteria for contents of an evaluation;
• Provide for the receipt of the appraisal or evaluation
report in a timely manner to facilitate the underwriting
decision;
• Assess the validity of existing appraisals or
evaluations to support subsequent transactions;
• Establish criteria for obtaining appraisals or
evaluations for transactions that are otherwise exempt
from the agencies' appraisal regulations; and
• Establish internal controls that promote compliance
with these program standards.
Selection of Individuals Who May Perform Appraisals and
Evaluations - An institution's program establishes criteria to
select, evaluate, and monitor the performance of the
individual(s) who performs a real estate appraisal or
evaluation. Appropriate criteria ensure that:
• The selection process is non-preferential and
unbiased;
• The individual selected possesses the requisite
education, expertise and competence to complete the
assignment;
• The individual selected is capable of rendering an
unbiased opinion; and
• The individual selected is independent and has no
direct or indirect interest, financial or otherwise, in the
property or the transaction.
Under the agencies’ appraisal regulations, the appraiser
must be selected and engaged directly by the institution or
its agent. The appraiser's client is the institution, not the
borrower. Also, an institution may not use an appraisal that
has been “readdressed” – appraisal reports that are altered
by the appraiser to replace any references to the original
client with the institution’s name. An institution may use
an appraisal that was prepared by an appraiser engaged
directly by another financial services institution, as long as
the institution determines that the appraisal conforms to the
agencies' appraisal regulations and is otherwise acceptable.
Independence of the Appraisal and Evaluation Function -
Because the appraisal and evaluation process is an integral
component of the credit underwriting process, it should be
isolated from influence by the institution's loan production
process. An appraiser and an individual providing
evaluation services should be independent of the loan and
collection functions of the institution and have no interest,
financial or otherwise, in the property or the transaction. In
addition, individuals independent from the loan production
area should oversee the selection of appraisers and
individuals providing evaluation services. If absolute lines
of independence cannot be achieved, an institution must be
able to clearly demonstrate that it has prudent safeguards to
isolate its collateral evaluation process from influence or
interference from the loan production process. That is, no
single person should have sole authority to render credit
decisions on loans which they ordered or reviewed
appraisals or evaluations.
The agencies recognize, however, that it is not always
possible or practical to separate the loan and collection
functions from the appraisal or evaluation process. In some
cases, such as in a small or rural institution or branch, the
only individual qualified to analyze the real estate collateral
may also be a loan officer, other officer, or director of the
institution. To ensure their independence, such lending
officials, officers, or directors abstain from any vote or
 
  

approval involving loans on which they performed an
appraisal or evaluation.
Transactions That Require Appraisals - Although the
agencies' appraisal regulations exempt certain categories of
real estate-related financial transactions from the appraisal
requirements, most real estate transactions over $400,000
($500,000 for commercial real estate transactions) are
considered federally related transactions and thus require
appraisals. A "federally related transaction" means any real
estate-related financial transaction, in which the agencies
engage, contract for, or regulate and that requires the
services of an appraiser. An agency also may impose more
stringent appraisal requirements than the appraisal
regulations require, such as when an institution's troubled
condition is attributable to real estate loan underwriting
problems.
Minimum Appraisal Standards - The agencies' appraisal
regulations include five minimum standards for the
preparation of an appraisal. The appraisal must:
• Conform to generally accepted appraisal standards as
evidenced by the Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice (USPAP) promulgated by the
Appraisal Standards Board (ASB) of the Appraisal
Foundation unless principles of safe and sound
banking require compliance with stricter standards.
Although allowed by USPAP, the agencies' appraisal
regulations do not permit an appraiser to appraise any
property in which the appraiser has an interest, direct
or indirect, financial or otherwise;
• Be written and contain sufficient information and
analysis to support the institution's decision to engage
in the transaction. As discussed below, appraisers
have available various appraisal development and
report options; however, not all options may be
appropriate for all transactions. A report option is
acceptable under the agencies' appraisal regulations
only if the appraisal report contains sufficient
information and analysis to support an institution's
decision to engage in the transaction.
• Analyze and report appropriate deductions and
discounts for proposed construction or renovation,
partially leased buildings, non-market lease terms, and
tract developments with unsold units. This standard is
designed to avoid having appraisals prepared using
unrealistic assumptions and inappropriate methods.
For federally related transactions, an appraisal is to
include the current market value of the property in its
actual physical condition and subject to the zoning in
effect as of the date of the appraisal. For properties
where improvements are to be constructed or
rehabilitated, the regulated institution may also
request a prospective market value based on stabilized
occupancy or a value based on the sum of retail sales.
However, the sum of retail sales for a proposed
development is not the market value of the
development for the purpose of the agencies' appraisal
regulations. For proposed developments that involve
the sale of individual houses, units, or lots, the
appraiser must analyze and report appropriate
deductions and discounts for holding costs, marketing
costs and entrepreneurial profit. For proposed and
rehabilitated rental developments, the appraiser must
make appropriate deductions and discounts for items
such as leasing commission, rent losses, and tenant
improvements from an estimate based on stabilized
occupancy;
• Be based upon the definition of market value set forth
in the regulation. Each appraisal must contain an
estimate of market value, as defined by the agencies'
appraisal regulations; and
• Be performed by state licensed or certified appraisers
in accordance with requirements set forth in the
regulation.
Appraisal Options - An appraiser typically uses three
market value approaches to analyze the value of a property
cost, income, and sales market. The appraiser reconciles the
results of each approach to estimate market value. An
appraisal will discuss the property's recent sales history and
contain an opinion as to the highest and best use of the
property. An appraiser must certify that he/she has
complied with USPAP and is independent. Also, the
appraiser must disclose whether the subject property was
inspected and whether anyone provided significant
assistance to the person signing the appraisal report.
An institution may engage an appraiser to perform either a
Complete or Limited Appraisal. When performing a
Complete Appraisal assignment, an appraiser must comply
with all USPAP standards - without departing from any
binding requirements - and specific guidelines when
estimating market value. When performing a Limited
Appraisal, the appraiser elects to invoke the Departure
Provision which allows the appraiser to depart, under
limited conditions, from standards identified as specific
guidelines. For example, in a Limited Appraisal, the
appraiser might not utilize all three approaches to value;
however, departure from standards designated as binding
requirements is not permitted. There are numerous binding
requirements which are detailed in the USPAP. Use of the
USPAP Standards publication as a reference is
recommended. The book provides details on each appraisal
standard and advisory opinions issued by the Appraisal
Standards Board.
An institution and appraiser must concur that use of the
Departure Provision is appropriate for the transaction before
the appraiser commences the appraisal assignment. The
appraiser must ensure that the resulting appraisal report will
 
 

not mislead the institution or other intended users of the
appraisal report. The agencies do not prohibit the use of a
Limited Appraisal for a federally related transaction, but the
agencies believe that institutions should be cautious in their
use of a Limited Appraisal because it will be less thorough
than a Complete Appraisal.
Complete and Limited Appraisal assignments may be
reported in three different report formats: a Self-Contained
Report, a Summary Report, or a Restricted Report. The
major difference among these three reports relates to the
degree of detail presented in the report by the appraiser. The
Self-Contained Appraisal Report provides the most detail,
while the Summary Appraisal Report presents the
information in a condensed manner. The Restricted Report
provides a capsulated report with the supporting details
maintained in the appraiser's files.
The agencies believe that the Restricted Report format will
not be appropriate to underwrite a significant number of
federally related transactions due to the lack of sufficient
supporting information and analysis in the appraisal report.
However, it might be appropriate to use this type of
appraisal report for ongoing collateral monitoring of an
institution's real estate transactions and under other
circumstances when an institution's program requires an
evaluation.
Moreover, since the institution is responsible for selecting
the appropriate appraisal report to support its underwriting
decisions, its program should identify the type of appraisal
report that will be appropriate for various lending
transactions. The institution's program should consider the
risk, size, and complexity of the individual loan and the
supporting collateral when determining the level of
appraisal development and the type of report format that
will be ordered. When ordering an appraisal report,
institutions may want to consider the benefits of a written
engagement letter that outlines the institution's expectations
and delineates each party's responsibilities, especially for
large, complex, or out-of-area properties.
Transactions That Require Evaluations - A formal opinion
of market value prepared by a state licensed or certified
appraiser is not always necessary. Instead, less formal
evaluations of the real estate may suffice for transactions
that are exempt from the agencies' appraisal requirements.
Additionally, prudent institutions establish criteria for
obtaining appraisals or evaluations for safety and soundness
reasons for transactions that are otherwise exempt from the
agencies' appraisal regulations.
Evaluation Content - Prudent standards for preparing
evaluations typically require that evaluations:
• Be written;
• Include the preparer's name, address, and signature,
and the effective date of the evaluation;
• Describe the real estate collateral, its condition, its
current and projected use;
• Describe the source(s) of information used in the
analysis;
• Describe the analysis and supporting information; and
• Provide an estimate of the real estate's market value,
with any limiting conditions.
An appropriate evaluation report includes calculations,
supporting assumptions, and, if utilized, a discussion of
comparable sales. Documentation should be sufficient to
allow an institution to understand the analysis, assumptions,
and conclusions. An institution's own real estate loan
portfolio experience and value estimates prepared for recent
loans on comparable properties might provide a basis for
evaluations.
An appropriate evaluation provides an estimate of value to
assist the institution in assessing the soundness of the
transaction. Prudent practices may include more detailed
evaluations as an institution engages in more complex real
estate-related financial transactions, or as its overall
exposure increases. For example, an evaluation for a home
equity loan might be based primarily on information derived
from a sales data services organization or current tax
assessment information, while an evaluation for an incomeproducing real estate property describes the current and
expected use of the property and includes an analysis of the
property's rental income and expenses.
Qualifications of Evaluation Providers - Individuals who
prepare evaluations should have real estate-related training
or experience and knowledge of the market relevant to the
subject property. Based upon their experience and training,
professionals from several fields may be qualified to
prepare evaluations of certain types of real estate collateral.
Examples include individuals with appraisal experience,
real estate lenders, consultants or sales persons, agricultural
extension agents, or foresters. Well-managed institutions
document the qualifications and experience level of
individuals whom the institution deems acceptable to
perform evaluations. An institution might also augment its
in-house expertise and hire an outside party familiar with a
certain market or a particular type of property. Although
not required, an institution may use state licensed or
certified appraisers to prepare evaluations. As such,
Limited Appraisals reported in a Summary or Restricted
format may be appropriate for evaluations of real estaterelated financial transactions exempt from the agencies'
appraisal requirements.
Valid Appraisals and Evaluations - The institution may use
an existing appraisal or evaluation to support a subsequent
transaction, if the institution documents that the existing
 
  

estimate of value remains valid. Therefore, a prudent
appraisal and evaluation program includes criteria to
determine whether an existing appraisal or evaluation
remains valid to support a subsequent transaction. Criteria
for determining whether an existing appraisal or evaluation
remains valid will vary depending upon the condition of the
property and the marketplace, and the nature of any
subsequent transaction. Factors that could cause changes to
originally reported values include: the passage of time; the
volatility of the local market; the availability of financing;
the inventory of competing properties; improvements to, or
lack of maintenance of, the subject property or competing
surrounding properties; changes in zoning; or
environmental contamination. The institution must
document the information sources and analyses used to
conclude that an existing appraisal or evaluation remains
valid for subsequent transactions.
Renewals, Refinancings, and Other Subsequent
Transactions - The agencies' appraisal regulations generally
allow appropriate evaluations of real estate collateral in lieu
of an appraisal for loan renewals and refinancings; however,
in certain situations an appraisal is required. If new funds
are advanced in excess of reasonable closing costs, an
institution is expected to obtain a new appraisal for the
renewal of an existing transaction when there is a material
change in market conditions or in the physical aspects of the
property that threatens the institution's real estate collateral
protection.
The decision to reappraise or reevaluate the real estate
collateral should be guided by the regulatory exemption for
renewals, refinancings, and other subsequent transactions.
Loan workouts, debt restructurings, loan assumptions, and
similar transactions involving the addition or substitution of
borrowers may qualify for the exemption for renewals,
refinancings, and other subsequent transactions. Use of this
exemption depends on the condition and quality of the loan,
the soundness of the underlying collateral and the validity
of the existing appraisal or evaluation.
A reappraisal would not be required when an institution
advances funds to protect its interest in a property, such as
to repair damaged property, because these funds would be
used to restore the damaged property to its original
condition. If a loan workout involves modification of the
terms and conditions of an existing credit, including
acceptance of new or additional real estate collateral, which
facilitates the orderly collection of the credit or reduces the
institution's risk of loss, a reappraisal or reevaluation may
be prudent, even if it is obtained after the modification
occurs.
An institution may engage in a subsequent transaction based
on documented equity from a valid appraisal or evaluation,
if the planned future use of the property is consistent with
the use identified in the appraisal or evaluation. If a
property, however, has reportedly appreciated because of a
planned change in use of the property, such as rezoning, an
appraisal would be required for a federally related
transaction, unless another exemption applied.
Program Compliance - Appropriate appraisal and
evaluation programs establish effective internal controls
that promote compliance with the program's standards. An
individual familiar with the appraisal regulations should
ensure that the institution's appraisals and evaluations
comply with the appraisal regulations and the institution's
program. Typically, loan administration files document this
compliance review, although a detailed analysis or
comprehensive analytical procedures are not required for
every appraisal or evaluation. For some loans, the
compliance review may be part of the loan officer's overall
credit analysis and may take the form of either a narrative
or a checklist. Examiners should determine whether
corrective action for noted deficiencies was undertaken by
the individual who prepared the appraisal or evaluation.
Effective appraisal and evaluation programs have
comprehensive analytical procedures that focus on certain
types of loans, such as large-dollar credits, loans secured by
complex or specialized properties, non-residential real
estate construction loans, or out-of-area real estate. These
comprehensive analytical procedures are typically designed
to verify that the methods, assumptions, and conclusions are
reasonable and appropriate for the transaction and the
property. These procedures provide for a more detailed
review of selected appraisals and evaluations prior to the
final credit decision. The individual(s) performing these
reviews should have the appropriate training or experience,
and be independent of the transaction.
Appraisers and persons performing evaluations are
responsible for any deficiencies in their reports. Deficient
reports should be returned to them for correction.
Unreliable appraisals or evaluations should be replaced
prior to the final credit decision. Examiners should be
mindful that changes to an appraisal's estimate of value are
permitted only as a result of a review conducted by an
appropriately qualified state licensed or certified appraiser
in accordance with Standard III of USPAP.
Portfolio Monitoring - The institution also typically
develops criteria for obtaining reappraisals or reevaluations
as part of a program of prudent portfolio review and
monitoring techniques, even when additional financing is
not being contemplated. Examples of such types of
situations include large credit exposures and out-of-area
loans.
Referrals - Financial institutions are encouraged to make
referrals directly to state appraiser regulatory authorities
 
 
when a state licensed or certified appraiser violates USPAP,
applicable state law, or engages in other unethical or
unprofessional conduct. Examiners finding evidence of
unethical or unprofessional conduct by appraisers will
forward their findings and recommendations to their
supervisory office for appropriate disposition and referral to
the state, as necessary.
Examination Treatment
All apparent violations of the appraisal regulation should be
described in the schedule of violations of laws and
regulations. Management's comments and any
commitments for correcting the practices that led to the
apparent violation should be included. Violations that are
technical in nature and do not impact the value conclusion
generally should not require a new appraisal. (These
technical violations should not be relisted in subsequent
examinations.) Since the point of an appraisal is to help
make sound loan underwriting decisions, getting an
appraisal on a loan already made simply to fulfill the
requirements of the appraisal regulation, would be of little
benefit. However, an institution should be expected to
obtain a new appraisal on a loan in violation of the appraisal
regulation when there is a safety and soundness reason for
such action. For example, construction loans and lines of
credit need to have the value of the real estate reviewed
frequently in order for the institution to properly manage the
credit relationship. A new appraisal might also be needed
to determine the proper classification for examination
purposes of a collateral dependent loan.
Loan Participations
A loan participation is a sharing or selling of ownership
interests in a loan between two or more financial
institutions. Normally, a lead institution originates the loan
and sells ownership interests to one or more participating
banks at the time the loan is closed. The lead (originating)
institution retains a partial interest in the loan, holds all loan
documentation in its own name, services the loan, and deals
directly with the customer for the benefit of all participants.
Properly structured, loan participations allow selling banks
to accommodate large loan requests which would otherwise
exceed lending limits, diversify risk, and improve liquidity.
Participating banks are able to compensate for low local
loan demand or invest in large loans without servicing
burdens and origination costs. If not appropriately
structured and documented, a participation loan can present
unwarranted risks to both the seller and purchaser of the
loan. Examiners should determine the nature and adequacy
of the participation arrangement as well as analyze the credit
quality of the loan.
Accounting
The proper accounting treatment for loan participations is
governed by ASC Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing, that
applies to the transferor (seller) of assets and the transferee
(purchaser).
Before considering whether the conditions for a sale have
been met, the transfer of a portion of an entire financial asset
must first meet the definition of a participating interest.
A participating interest in an entire financial asset, as
defined in ASC Topic 860, has all of the following
characteristics:
• From the date of transfer, it must represent a
proportionate (pro-rata) ownership interest in the
entire financial asset;
• From the date of the transfer, all cash flows received
from the entire financial asset, except any cash flows
allocated as compensation for servicing or other
services performed (which must not be subordinated
and must not significantly exceed an amount that
would fairly compensate a substitute service provider
should one be required), must be divided
proportionately among the participating interest
holders in an amount equal to their share of
ownership;
• The rights of each participating interest holder
(including the lead lender) must have the same
priority, no interest is subordinated to another interest,
and no participating interest holder has recourse to the
lead lender or another participating interest holder
other than standard representations and warranties and
ongoing contractual servicing and administration
obligations; and
• No party has the right to pledge or exchange the entire
financial asset unless all participating interest holders
agree to do so.
If the financial asset meets the definition of a participating
interest, the institution must then determine if the
participating interest qualifies for sale treatment. The sale
criteria focus on whether or not control is effectively
transferred to the purchaser.
A transfer of an entire financial asset, a group of financial
assets, or a participating interest in an entire financial asset
in which the transferor surrenders control over those
financial assets shall be accounted for as a sale if and only
if all of the following conditions are met:
• The transferred financial assets have been isolated
from the seller, meaning that the purchaser's interest in
the loan is presumptively beyond the reach of the
seller and its creditors, even in bankruptcy or other
receivership;
 
  

• Each purchaser has the right to pledge or exchange its
interest in the loan, and there are no conditions that
both constrain the purchaser from taking advantage of
that right to pledge or exchange and provide more
than a trivial benefit to the seller; and
• The seller or their agents do not maintain effective
control over the transferred financial assets. Examples
of a seller maintaining effective control include an
agreement that both entitles and obligates the seller to
repurchase or redeem the purchaser's interest in the
loan prior to the loan's maturity, an agreement that
provides the seller with the unilateral ability to cause
the purchaser to return its interest in the loan to the
seller (other than through a cleanup call), or an
agreement that permits the purchaser to require the
seller to repurchase its interest in the loan at a price so
favorable to the purchaser that it is probable that the
purchaser will require the seller to repurchase.
Right to Repurchase
Some loan participation agreements may give the seller a
contractual right to repurchase the participated interest in
the loan at any time. In this case, the seller's right to
repurchase the participation effectively provides the seller
with a call option on a specific asset that would preclude
sale accounting if the asset is not readily obtainable in the
marketplace. If a loan participation agreement contains
such a provision, freestanding or attached, it constrains the
purchaser from pledging or exchanging its participating
interest, and results in the seller maintaining effective
control over the participating interest. In such cases, the
transfer would be accounted for as a secured borrowing.
For additional information on the transfer of loan
participations refer to the Call Report Glossary entry:
“Transfers of Financial Assets”.
Recourse Arrangements
Recourse arrangements may, or may not, preclude loan
participations from being accounted for as sales for
financial reporting purposes. The date of the participation
and the formality of the recourse provision affect the
accounting for the transaction. Formal recourse provisions
may affect the accounting treatment of a participation
depending upon the date that the participation is transferred
to another institution. Implicit recourse provisions would
not affect the financial reporting treatment of a participation
because the accounting standards look to the contractual
terms of asset transfers in determining whether or not the
criteria necessary for sales accounting treatment have been
met. Although implicit recourse provisions would not affect
the accounting treatment of a loan participation, they may
affect the risk-based capital treatment of a participation.
If an originating selling institution has transferred a loan
participation to a participating institution with recourse on
or before December 31, 2001, the existence of the recourse
obligation in and of itself does not preclude sale accounting
for the transfer. If a loan participation transferred with
recourse on or before December 31, 2001, meets the three
conditions then in effect for the transferor to have
surrendered control over the transferred assets, the transfer
should be accounted for as a sale for financial reporting
purposes. However, a loan participation sold with recourse
is subject to the banking agencies’ risk-based capital
requirements.
If an originating selling institution transfers a loan
participation with recourse on or after January 1, 2002, the
participation generally will not be considered isolated from
the originating lender in an FDIC receivership. Section
360.6 of the FDIC Rules and Regulations limits the FDIC's
ability to reclaim loan participations transferred without
recourse as defined in the regulations, but does not limit the
FDIC's ability to reclaim loan participations transferred
with recourse. Under Section 360.6, a participation subject
to an agreement that requires the originating lender to
repurchase the participation or to otherwise compensate the
participating institution due to a default on the underlying
loan is considered a participation with recourse. As a result,
a loan participation transferred with recourse on or after
January 1, 2002, generally should be accounted for as a
secured borrowing and not as a sale for financial reporting
purposes. This means that the originating lender should not
remove the participation from its loan assets on the balance
sheet, but should report the loan participation as a secured
borrowing.
Call Report Treatment
When a loan participation meets the definition of a
participating interest and the conditions for sale treatment
are met, the seller removes the participated interest in the
loan from the balance sheet. The purchaser reports the
participating interest in “Loans” in the Report of Condition,
and in Call Report Schedule RC-C - Loans and Lease
Financing Receivables, based upon collateral, borrower, or
purpose. When a loan participation does not meet the
definition of a participating interest, or if a transfer of a
participating interest does not meet all of the conditions for
sale accounting, the transfer must be reported as a secured
borrowing with a pledge of collateral. In these situations,
because the transferred loan participation does not qualify
for sale accounting, the transferring institution must
continue to report the transferred participation (as well as
the retained portion of the loan) in “Loans” in the Report of
Condition, based upon collateral, borrower, and purpose.
As a consequence, the transferred loan participation should
be included in the originating lender’s loans and leases for
purposes of determining the appropriate level for the
 
 

institution’s allowance for loan and lease losses. The
transferring institution should also report the transferred
loan participation as a secured borrowing in “Other
Borrowed Money” in the Report of Condition.
Independent Credit Analysis
An institution purchasing a participation loan is expected to
perform the same degree of independent credit analysis on
the loan as if it were the originator. To determine if a
participation loan meets its credit standards, a participating
institution must obtain all relevant credit information and
details on collateral values, lien status, loan agreements and
participation agreements before a commitment is made to
purchase. The absence of such information may be
evidence that the participating institution has not been
prudent in its credit decision.
During the life of the participation, the participant should
monitor the servicing and the status of the loan. In order to
exercise control of its ownership interest, a purchasing
institution must ascertain that the selling institution will
provide complete and timely credit information on a
continuing basis.
The procedures for purchasing loan participations should be
provided for in the institution's formal lending policy. The
criteria for participation loans should be consistent with that
for similar direct loans. The policy would normally require
the complete analysis of the credit quality of obligations to
be purchased, determination of value and lien status of
collateral, and the maintenance of full credit information for
the life of the participation.
Participation Agreements
A participation loan can present unique problems if the
borrower defaults, the lead institution becomes insolvent, or
a party to the participation arrangement does not perform as
expected. These contingencies should be considered in a
written participation agreement. The agreement should
clearly state the limitations the originating and participating
banks impose on each other and the rights all parties retain.
In addition to the general terms of the participation
transaction, comprehensive participation agreements
specifically include the following considerations:
• The obligation of the lead institution to furnish timely
credit information and to provide notification of
material changes in the borrower's status;
• Requirements that the lead institution consult with
participants prior to modifying any loan, guaranty, or
security agreements and before taking any action on
defaulted loans;
• The specific rights and remedies available to the lead
and participating banks upon default of the borrower;
• Resolution procedures when the lead and participating
banks cannot agree on the handling of a defaulted
loan;
• Resolution of any potential conflicts between the lead
institution and participants in the event that more than
one loan to the borrower defaults; and
• Provisions for terminating the agency relationship
between the lead and participating banks upon such
events as insolvency, breach of duty, negligence, or
misappropriation by one of the parties.
Participations Between Affiliated Institutions
Examiners should ascertain that banks do not relax their
credit standards when dealing with affiliated institutions and
that participation loans between affiliated institutions
comply with Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act. The
Federal Reserve Board’s staff has interpreted that the
purchase of a participation loan from an affiliate is exempt
from Section 23A provided that the commitment to
purchase is obtained by the affiliate before the loan is
consummated by the affiliate, and the decision to participate
is based upon the institution's independent evaluation of the
creditworthiness of the loan. If these criteria are not strictly
met, the loan participation could be subject to the qualitative
and/or quantitative restrictions of Section 23A. Refer to the
Related Organizations Section of this Manual which
describes transactions with affiliates.
Sales of 100 Percent Loan Participations
In some cases, depository institutions structure loan
originations and participations with the intention of selling
100 percent of the underlying loan amount. Certain 100
percent loan participation programs raise unique safety and
soundness issues that should be addressed by an
institution’s policies, procedures, and practices.
If not appropriately structured, these 100 percent
participation programs can present unwarranted risks to the
originating institution including legal, and compliance risks.
Therefore, agreements to mitigate these risks clearly state
the limitations the originating and participating institutions
impose on each other and the rights all parties retain. This
typically includes the originating institution stating that loan
participants are participating in loans and are not investing
in a business enterprise. The policies of an institution
engaged in these originations typically address safety and
soundness concerns and include criteria to address:
• The program’s objectives – these should be of a
commercial nature (structured as commercial
undertakings and not as investments in securities).
• The plan of distribution – participants should be
limited to sophisticated financial and commercial
 
 

entities and sophisticated persons and the
participations should not be sold directly to the public.
• The credit requirements applicable to the borrower -
the originating institution should structure 100% loan
participation programs only for borrowers who meet
the originating institution’s credit requirements.
• Access afforded program participants to financial
information on the borrower - the originating
institution should allow potential loan participants to
obtain and review appropriate credit and other
information to enable the participants to make an
informed credit decision.
Environmental Risk Program
The potential adverse effect of environmental
contamination on the value of real property and the potential
for liability under various environmental laws are important
factors for institution management to consider in evaluating
real estate transactions and making loans secured by real
estate. Institutions that establish appropriate environmental
risk programs lower their potential liability for certain types
of environmental risks and penalties per the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
of 1980 (CERCLA).
1
An appropriate environmental risk program is consistent
with the safety and soundness standards prescribed in
Appendix A to Part 364 of the FDIC Rules and Regulations.
The environmental risk program enables institution
management to make an informed lending decision and to
assess risk, as necessary, and helps provide for
consideration of the nature and value of any underlying
collateral. Such a program also is consistent with the real
estate lending standards prescribed in Part 365 of the
FDIC’s Rules and Regulations relating to compliance with
all real estate related laws and regulations, which include
the CERCLA.
Thus, examiners should verify that institutions maintain an
environmental risk program to evaluate the potential
adverse effect of environmental contamination on the value
of real property and the potential environmental liability
associated with the real property. An effective
environmental risk program aids management’s decisionmaking process by establishing procedures for identifying
and evaluating potential environmental concerns associated
with lending practices and other actions relating to real
property.
Examiners should determine whether the board of directors
reviews and approves the program periodically and
1 See CERCLA, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901
designates a senior officer knowledgeable in environmental
matters to be responsible for program implementation.
Examiners should assess whether the environmental risk
program is commensurate with the institution’s operations.
That is, institutions that have a heavier concentration of
loans to higher risk industries or localities of known
contamination may require a more elaborate and
sophisticated environmental risk program than institutions
that lend more to lower risk industries or localities. For
example, loans collateralized by 1- to 4-family residences
normally have less exposure to environmental liability than
loans to finance industrial properties.
Elements of an Effective Environmental Risk Program
The environmental risk program typically provides for staff
training, sets environmental policy guidelines and
procedures, requires an environmental review or analysis
during the application or due diligence process, includes
loan documentation standards, and establishes appropriate
environmental risk assessment safeguards in loan workout
situations and foreclosures.
Training
The environmental risk program generally incorporates
training sufficient to ensure that the environmental risk
program is implemented and followed, and that the
appropriate personnel have the knowledge and experience
to identify and evaluate potential environmental concerns
that might affect the institution, including its interests in real
property. Such training programs typically address
circumstances where the complexity of the environmental
issue is beyond the expertise of the institution’s staff to
adequately assess by instructing staff to consult legal
counsel, environmental consultants, or other qualified
experts.
Policies
Loan policies and written procedures typically address
environmental issues pertinent to the institution’s specific
lending activities. For example, the lending policy may
identify the types of environmental risks associated with
industries and real estate in the institution’s trade area,
provide guidelines for conducting an analysis of potential
environmental liability, and describe procedures for the
resolution of potential environmental concerns. Procedures
for the resolution of environmental concerns might also be
developed for credit monitoring, loan workout situations,
and foreclosures.
et seq., and the Asset Conservation, Lender Liability, and Deposit
Insurance Protection Act of 1996 (Asset Conservation Act).
 
  

Environmental Risk Analysis
Examiners should determine whether management
conducts an initial environmental risk analysis during the
application process prior to making a loan. An appropriate
analysis helps management to minimize potential
environmental liability and facilitates implementation of
appropriate mitigation strategies prior to closing a loan.
Much of the needed information may be gathered by the
account officer when interviewing the loan applicant
concerning his or her business activities. Some institutions
use the loan application to request relevant environmental
information, such as the present and past uses of the
property and the occurrence of any contacts by federal, state
or local governmental agencies about environmental
matters. For some transactions, the loan officer or other
representative of an institution may visit the site to evaluate
whether there is obvious visual evidence of environmental
concerns; such visits are usually documented in the loan
file.
Structured Environmental Risk Assessment
Whenever the application, interview, or visitation indicates
a possible environmental concern, examiners should
determine whether a more detailed structured investigation
was conducted by a qualified individual. This investigation
may include surveying prior owners of the property,
researching past uses of the property, inspecting the site and
contiguous parcels, and reviewing company records for past
use or disposal of hazardous materials. A review of public
records and contact with federal and state environmental
protection agencies often helps institution management
determine whether the borrower has been cited for
violations concerning environmental laws or if the property
has been identified on federal and state lists of real property
with significant environmental contamination. Examiners
should also determine whether the institution’s policies and
procedures consider the Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) “All Appropriate Inquiry Rule.”
EPA All Appropriate Inquiry Rule – In January 2002,
Congress amended the CERCLA to establish, among
other things, additional protections from cleanup
liability for a new owner of a property. The bona fide
prospective purchaser provision establishes that a
person may purchase property with the knowledge that
the property is contaminated without being held
potentially liable for the cleanup of contamination at
the property.
The new owner must meet certain statutory
requirements to qualify as a bona fide prospective
purchaser and, prior to the date of acquiring the
property, undertake “all appropriate inquiries” into the
prior ownership and uses of the property.
In November 2005, the EPA promulgated its
“Standards and Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries”
final rule (EPA All Appropriate Inquiry Rule) which
establishes the standards and practices that are
necessary to meet the requirements for an “all
appropriate inquiry” into the prior ownership and uses
of a property. The All Appropriate Inquiry Rule
became effective on November 1, 2006.
An environmental evaluation of the property that meets
the standards and practices of the EPA All Appropriate
Inquiry Rule will provide the borrower with added
protection from CERCLA cleanup liability, provided
the borrower meets the requirements to be a bona fide
purchaser and other statutory requirements. This
protection, however, is limited to CERCLA and does
not apply to the Resource Compensation and Recovery
Act (RCRA), including liability associated with
underground storage tanks, and other federal
environmental statutes, and, depending on state law,
state environmental statutes. In addition, such an
environmental evaluation may provide a more detailed
assessment of the property than an evaluation that does
not conform to the EPA All Appropriate Inquiry Rule.
Examiner’s should determine whether, as part of its
environmental risk analysis of any particular extension
of credit, a lender evaluates whether it is appropriate or
necessary to require the borrower to perform an
environmental evaluation that meets the standards and
practices of the EPA All Appropriate Inquiry Rule.
This decision involves judgment and is made on a caseby-case basis considering the risk characteristics of the
transaction, the type of property, and the environmental
information gained during an initial environmental risk
analysis. If indications of environmental concern are
known or discovered during the loan application
process, an institution may decide to require the
borrower to perform an environmental evaluation that
meets the requirements of the EPA All Appropriate
Inquiry Rule.
The decision to require the borrower to perform a
property assessment that meets the requirements of the
EPA All Appropriate Inquiry Rule is generally made in
the context of the institution’s environmental risk
program. An effective environmental risk program is
generally designed to ensure management makes an
informed judgment about potential environmental risk
and considers such risks in its overall consideration of
risks associated with the extension of credit. In
addition, an institution’s environmental risk program
may be tailored to its lending practices. Thus, a lender
makes its decision concerning when and under what
circumstances to require the borrower to perform an
 
  

environmental property assessment based on its
environmental risk program. Individuals who
administer an institution’s environmental risk program
are typically familiar with these statutory elements.
More information concerning the EPA All Appropriate
Rule can be found on the EPA website at
http://www.epa.gov/brownfields/regneg.htm.
Monitoring
Examiners should assess whether the environmental risk
assessment continues during the life of the loan, including
monitoring the borrower and the real property collateral for
potential environmental concerns. Examiners should assess
whether loan officers are aware of changes in the business
activities of a borrower that may result in a significant
increase in risk of environmental liability associated with
real property collateral. When there is a potential for
environmental contamination to adversely affect the value
of the collateral, management might exercise its rights under
the loan covenants to require the borrower to resolve the
environmental condition and to take actions to protect the
value of the real property.
Loan Documentation
Loan documents typically include language to safeguard the
institution against potential environmental losses and
liabilities. Such language might require that the borrower
comply with environmental laws, disclose information
about the environmental status of the real property
collateral, and grant the institution the right to acquire
additional information about potential hazardous
contamination by inspecting the collateral property for
environmental concerns. The loan documents might also
provide the institution the right to call the loan, refuse to
extend funds under a line of credit, or foreclose if hazardous
contamination is discovered. The loan documents might
also call for an indemnity of the institution by the borrower
and guarantors for environmental liability associated with
the real property collateral.
Involvement in the Borrower’s Operations
Under CERCLA and many state environmental cleanup
statutes, an institution may have an exemption from
environmental liability as the holder of a security interest in
real property collateral. Examiners should determine
whether institution management, in monitoring a loan, takes
action to resolve environmental situations and evaluates
whether its actions may constitute “participating in the
management” of the business located on the real property
collateral within the meaning of CERCLA. If its actions are
considered participation in the management, the institution
may lose its exemption from liability under CERCLA or
similar state statutes.
Foreclosure
A lender’s exposure to environmental liability may increase
significantly if it takes title to real property held as
collateral. Examiners should determine whether
management evaluates the potential costs and liability for
environmental contamination in conjunction with an
assessment of the value of the collateral in reaching a
decision to take title to the property by foreclosure or other
means. Based on the type of property involved, a lender
often includes as part of this evaluation of potential
environmental liability, an assessment of the property that
meets the requirements of the EPA All Appropriate Inquiry
Rule.
Examination Procedures
Examiners should review an institution’s environmental
risk program as part of the examination of lending and
investment activities. When analyzing individual credits,
examiners should review the institution’s compliance with
its environmental risk program. Failure to establish or
comply with an appropriate environmental program is to be
criticized.

LOAN PROBLEMS
It would be impossible to list all sources and causes of
problem loans. They cover a multitude of mistakes an
institution may permit a borrower to make, as well as
mistakes directly attributable to weaknesses in the
institution's credit administration and management. Some
well-constructed loans may develop problems due to
unforeseen circumstances on the part of the borrower;
however, institution management must endeavor to protect
a loan by every means possible. One or more of the items
in the following list is often basic to the development of loan
problems.
Many of these items may also be indicative of potential
institution fraud and/or insider abuse. Additional
information on the warning signs and suggested areas for
investigation are included in the Bank Fraud and Insider
Abuse Section of this Manual.
Poor Selection of Risks
Problems in this area may reflect the absence of sound
lending policies, and/or management's lack of sound credit
judgment in advancing certain loans. The following are
general types of loans which may fall within the category of
poor risk selection. It should be kept in mind that these
examples are generalizations, and the examiner must weigh
 
  

all relevant factors in determining whether a given loan is
indeed a poor risk.
• Loans to finance new and untried business ventures
which are inadequately capitalized.
• Loans based more upon the expectation of
successfully completing a business transaction than on
sound worth or collateral.
• Loans for the speculative purchase of securities or
goods.
• Collateral loans made without adequate margin of
security.
• Loans made because of other benefits, such as the
control of large deposit balances, and not based upon
sound worth or collateral.
• Loans made without adequate owner equity in
underlying real estate security.
• Loans predicated on collateral which has questionable
liquidation value.
• Loans predicated on the unmarketable stock of a local
corporation when the institution is at the same time
lending directly to the corporation. Action which may
be beneficial to the institution from the standpoint of
the one loan may be detrimental from the standpoint
of the other loan.
• Loans which appear to be adequately protected by
collateral or sound worth, but which involve a
borrower of poor character risk and credit reputation.
• Loans which appear to be adequately protected by
collateral, but which involve a borrower with limited
or unassessed repayment ability.
• An abnormal amount of loans involving
out-of-territory borrowers (excluding large banks
properly staffed to handle such loans).
• Loans involving brokered deposits or link financing.
Overlending
It is almost as serious, from the standpoint of ultimate
losses, to lend a sound financial risk too much money as it
is to lend to an unsound risk. Loans beyond the reasonable
capacity of the borrower to repay invariably lead to the
development of problem loans.
Failure to Establish or Enforce Liquidation
Agreements
Loans granted without a well-defined repayment program
violate a fundamental principle of sound lending.
Regardless of what appears to be adequate collateral
protection, failure to establish at inception or thereafter
enforce a program of repayment almost invariably leads to
troublesome and awkward servicing problems, and in many
instances is responsible for serious loan problems including
eventual losses. This axiom of sound lending is important
not only from the lender's standpoint, but also the
borrower’s.
Incomplete Credit Information
Lending errors frequently result because of management's
failure to obtain and properly evaluate credit information.
Adequate comparative financial statements, income
statements, cash flow statements and other pertinent
statistical support should be available. Other essential
information, such as the purpose of the borrowing and
intended plan or sources of repayment, progress reports,
inspections, memoranda of outside information and loan
conferences, correspondence, etc., should be contained in
the institution's credit files. Failure of an institution's
management to give proper attention to credit files makes
sound credit judgment difficult if not impossible.
Overemphasis on Loan Income
Misplaced emphasis upon loan income, rather than
soundness, almost always leads to the granting of loans
possessing undue risk. In the long run, unsound loans
usually are far more expensive than the amount of revenue
they may initially produce.
Self-Dealing
Pronounced self-dealing practices are often present in
serious problem institution situations and in banks which
fail. Such practices with regard to loans are found in the
form of overextensions of unsound credit to insiders, or
their interests, who have improperly used their positions to
obtain unjustified loans. Active officers, who serve at the
pleasure of the ownership interests, are at times subjected to
pressures which make it difficult to objectively evaluate
such loans. Loans made for the benefit of ownership
interests that are carried in the name of a seemingly
unrelated party are sometimes used to conceal self-dealing
loans.
Technical Incompetence
Technical incompetence usually is manifested in
management's inability to obtain and evaluate credit
information or put together a well-conceived loan package.
Management weaknesses in this area are almost certain to
lead to eventual loan losses. Problems can also develop
when management, technically sound in some forms of
lending, becomes involved in specialized types of credit in
which it lacks expertise and experience.
Lack of Supervision
 
  

Loan problems encountered in this area normally arise for
one of two reasons:
• Absence of effective active management supervision
of loans which possessed reasonable soundness at
inception. Ineffective supervision almost invariably
results from lack of knowledge of a borrower's affairs
over the life of the loan. It may well be coupled with
one or more of the causes and sources of loan
problems previously mentioned.
• Failure of the board and/or senior management to
properly oversee subordinates to determine that sound
policies are being carried out.
Lack of Attention to Changing Economic
Conditions
Economic conditions, both national and local, are
continuously changing, management must be responsive to
these changes. This is not to suggest that lending policies
should be in a constant state of flux, nor does it suggest that
management should be able to forecast totally the results of
economic changes. It does mean, however, that bankers
should realistically evaluate lending policies and individual
loans in light of changing conditions. Economic downturns
can adversely affect borrowers' repayment potential and can
lessen an institution's collateral protection. Reliance on
previously existing conditions as well as optimistic hopes
for economic improvement can, particularly when coupled
with one or more of the causes and sources of loan problems
previously mentioned, lead to serious loan portfolio
deterioration.
Competition
Competition among financial institutions for growth,
profitability, and community influence sometimes results in
the compromise of sound credit principles and acquisition
of unsound loans. The ultimate cost of unsound loans
outweighs temporary gains in growth, income and
influence.
Potential Problem Indicators by Document
The preceding discussions describe various practices or
conditions which may serve as a source or cause of weak
loans. Weak loans resulting from these practices or
conditions may manifest themselves in a variety of ways.
While it is impossible to provide a complete detailing of
potential "trouble indicators", the following list, by
document, may aid the examiner in identifying potential
problem loans during the examination process.
• Debt Instrument - Delinquency; irregular payments
or payments not in accordance with terms; unusual or
frequently modified terms; numerous renewals with
little or no principal reduction; renewals that include
interest; and extremely high interest rate in relation to
comparable loans granted by the institution or the
going rate for such loans in the institution's market
area.
• Liability Ledger - Depending on the type of debt,
failure to amortize in a regular fashion over a
reasonable period of time, e.g., on an annual basis,
seasonally, etc.; and a large number of out-of-territory
borrowers, particularly in cases where these types of
loans have increased substantially since the previous
examination.
• Financial and Operating Statements - Inadequate or
declining working capital position; excessive volume
or negative trend in receivables; unfavorable level or
negative trend in inventory; no recent aging of
receivables, or a marked slowing in receivables;
drastic increase in volume of payables; repeated and
increasing renewals of carry-over operating debt;
unfavorable trends in sales and profits; rapidly
expanding expenses; heavy debt-to-worth level and/or
deterioration in this relationship; large dividend or
other payments without adequate or reasonable
earnings retention; and net worth enhancements
resulting solely from reappraisal in the value of fixed
assets.
• Cash Flow Documentation - Absence of cash flow
statements or projections, particularly as related to
newly established term borrowers; projections
indicating an inability to meet required interest and
principal payments; and statements reflecting that cash
flow is being provided by the sale of fixed assets or
nonrecurring situations.
• Correspondence and Credit Files - Missing and/or
inadequate collateral or loan documentation, such as
financial statements, security agreements, guarantees,
assignments, hypothecation agreements, mortgages,
appraisals, legal opinions and title insurance, property
insurance, loan applications; evidence of borrower
credit checks; corporate or partnership borrowing
authorizations; letters indicating that a borrower has
suffered financial difficulties or has been unable to
meet established repayment programs; and documents
that reveal other unfavorable factors relative to a line
of credit.
• Collateral - Collateral evidencing a speculative loan
purpose or collateral with inferior marketability
characteristics (single purpose real estate, restricted
stock, etc.) which has not been compensated for by
other reliable repayment sources; and collateral of
questionable value acquired subsequent to the
extension of the credit.

 
  

SELECTING A LOAN REVIEW SAMPLE
IN A RISK-FOCUSED EXAMINATION
Examiners are expected to select a sample of loans that is of
sufficient size, scope, and variety to enable them to reach
reliable conclusions about the aforementioned aspects of an
institution’s overall lending function, and tailor the loan
review sample based on an institution’s business model,
complexity, risk profile, and lending activities. The review
may include all sources of credit exposure arising from
loans and leases, including guarantees, letters of credit, and
other commitments.
Assessing the Risk Profile
Prior to developing the loan review sample, examiners are
to assess the risk profile of the loan portfolio by reviewing
the institution’s management reports and policies as well as
agency available information. This includes evaluating
concerns detailed in prior Reports of Examination (ROEs),
issues detailed in the institution’s loan exception reports and
internal loan reviews, and the historical accuracy of
independent credit rating or grading systems. The Uniform
Bank Performance Report provides information relative to
loan mix and recent trends, such as concentrations of credit,
rapid growth, and loan yields higher or lower than peer in
different portfolio segments. Examiners are also to consider
changes in local economic or market conditions that could
affect the portfolio’s risk profile. Numerous economic tools
and resources are available to examiners to assist in
planning the loan review.
As part of the examination planning activities, examiners
are to consider whether management has implemented any
material changes in the institution’s business lines, loan
products, lending policies, markets, or personnel since the
prior examination. Additionally, examiners should consider
whether activities conducted by a branch, subsidiary,
affiliate, or third party partner warrant particular attention.
Examiners are to consider the historical adequacy of the
institution’s policies and practices relative to credit
underwriting, administration, and loan grading for each
significant loan type. Examiners should review recent
management reports and Board or committee packages
before selecting a targeted sample to determine whether the
Board of Directors and officers are receiving sufficient
information to remain abreast of emerging trends and
changes in the loan portfolio’s risk profile.
Selecting the Sample
The size and composition of the loan sample should be
commensurate with the quantity of credit risk, the adequacy
of risk management practices, and the institution’s financial
condition and business model. There are no established or
expected levels of minimum or maximum coverage, or
penetration, ratios for loan review samples. Rather,
examiners should use judgment when determining the focus
and extent of loan sampling. Ensuring that the appropriate
types of loans are in the sample is more meaningful than
how much of the overall portfolio is reviewed.
Examiners must make the most efficient use of resources,
and should sample loans of sufficient size, scope and variety
to enable them to form reliable conclusions about overall
credit quality and the adequacy of credit risk management
and governance. Examiners’ understanding of the
institution’s business model, risk profile, complexity,
external and internal reports, as well as discussions with
management, will be highly instrumental in identifying
loans to be included in a judgmental sample. Examiners
may also leverage the institution’s external and internal loan
reviews when determining the loan sample. For example,
examiners may want to exclude loans already covered in
institution loan reviews or follow-up on loans identified as
problems in the loan reviews.
If information gathered indicates weaknesses in
underwriting or credit administration practices, or if the
institution is engaging in lending activities with significant
or increasing risk, the examiner should select a robust
sample to fully assess the risk areas. Conversely,
institutions with stable, well-managed loan functions
exhibiting few signs of change should have more
streamlined reviews, focusing more on newer originations
and less on loans that were deemed of satisfactory quality at
previous examinations that continue to perform as agreed.
However, in all instances, examiners should sample enough
credits, including new and various-sized credits, to assess
the adequacy of asset quality, underwriting practices, and
credit risk management, in order to support ROE findings
and assigned ratings.
Nonhomogeneous Loan Sample
Nonhomogeneous loans include acquisition, development
and construction, commercial real estate, commercial and
industrial, and agricultural credits. The nonhomogeneous
loan sample generally should include a sufficient number of
loans to transaction test various segments of the loan
portfolio, but it is unnecessary to review all loans in a
particular segment. Rather, the loan review should
encompass enough loans in each portfolio segment to
support examination conclusions about credit quality and
credit management practices relative to underwriting
standards and credit administration.
In general, a sampling of loans in the following segments
should be included in the overall loan review sample, as
applicable to a particular institution:
 
  

• Adversely classified or listed for Special Mention in
prior ROEs.
• Delinquent, nonaccrual, impaired, or
renegotiated/restructured (particularly loans with
multiple renewals).
• Internally adversely classified by the institution.
• Rated by the institution as a marginally acceptable
credit.
• Subject to prior supervisory criticism or corrective
actions.
• Upgraded or removed from internal adverse
classification since the prior examination, to ensure
that procedures for managing the watch list are
appropriate.
• Insider loans (directors, officers, employees, principal
shareholders, or related interests at any insured
depository institution).
• Originated since the prior examination, including
those in new or expanding product lines.
• Participations.
• Out of territory.
• Part of a significant credit concentration or growth
area.
• Flagged for potential fraud.
• Contain outlier characteristics (e.g. higher risk loans,
credits with policy exceptions).
• Originated by specific loan officers, particularly those
with known concerns or weaknesses.
• In geographic areas exposed to changes in market
conditions.
• Various sized loans (larger, mid-sized, and smaller
loan amounts).
As part of a risk-focused and forward-looking approach to
loan review, loans that had been reviewed at previous
examinations that had sufficient performance, collateral and
documentation, and continue to amortize as agreed, may be
more appropriate for Discuss Only or not included at all,
which would allow more resources to be focused on new
originations or other loans not previously reviewed that
would help evaluate areas of significant or growing risk.
Homogeneous Pool Sample
Assessing the quality of homogeneous retail consumer
credit on a loan-by-loan basis is burdensome for both
institutions and examiners due to portfolios generally
consisting of a large number of loans with relatively low
balances. Instead, examiners should assess the quality of
retail consumer loans based on the borrowers’ repayment
performance. Examiners generally should review and
classify retail consumer loans in accordance with the
procedures discussed later in this section under the
Interagency Retail Credit Classification Policy subheading.
The EIC may supplement the classification of retail loans
with a direct review of larger consumer loans or by sampling
various segments when the risk assessment supports doing
so. Such an expansion may be warranted when
homogeneous lending is a major business line of the
institution or when examiners note rapid growth, new
products, weaknesses in the loan review or audit program,
weaknesses in management information systems, or other
factors that raise concerns. The EIC also may conduct
limited transaction testing to focus on specific risk
characteristics, such as the underwriting standards for new
loans or the revised terms granted in workouts or
modifications.
Sampling for Trading and Derivatives Activities. At
institutions that are active in such markets, examiners
should include an assessment of credit exposures arising
from matching loans with derivatives (generally swaps or
forwards) to hedge a particular type of risk. For example,
an institution can use a swap to contractually exchange a
stream of floating-rate payments for a stream of fixed-rate
payments to hedge interest rate risk. Such activities create
a credit exposure relative to both the loan and the derivative.
When warranted, examiners should review a sufficient
number of loan relationships with these exposures to assess
the institution’s overall exposure and management’s ability
to prudently manage derivatives activities. Examiners also
should review a sample of credit relationships established
solely for the purpose of facilitating derivatives activities.
Determining the Depth of the Review
Examiners should assign loans to be reviewed into one of
three groupings, “In Scope” (full review), “Discuss Only”
(limited review), and, when applicable, “Group” (pooled
loans).
In Scope. This sample consists of loans that warrant the
most comprehensive level of review. Examiners are to
review loan files to the extent needed to assess the risk in
the credit, conformance to lending risk management
policies and procedures, and compliance with applicable
laws and regulations. Examiners should document the
assessment of the borrower’s repayment capacity, collateral
protection, and overall risk to the institution on individual
linesheets. Documentation should also note underwriting
exceptions, administrative weaknesses, and apparent
violations.
For institutions with stable, well-managed loan functions, In
Scope loans should generally focus on newer originations
and insider loans. In these situations, if certain loans from
previous examinations are included In Scope, examiners
have the ability to leverage documentation from previous
 
  

reviews and focus on updates to the essential credit
information.
Discuss Only. This sample is to consist of loans subject to
a limited level of review, and examiners are to discuss these
credits with institution management. Such discussions can
be an effective method of confirming the adequacy of loan
grading systems and credit administration practices,
particularly when the In Scope sample indicates the
institution has adequate risk management practices, and
when the institution has a stable, well-managed loan
function and exhibits few signs of change. Examiners
should briefly document key issues raised during these
discussions, but examiners do not need to complete full
linesheets. When warranted, examiners may conduct a
limited file review or assessment of specific work-out plans
and performance metrics for these loans.
Credits should be reallocated from Discuss Only to In Scope
if management disagrees with the classification, material
concerns with credit underwriting or administration
practices are identified, or the EIC or Asset Manager
determines a more comprehensive review is warranted.
Group. This sample could include loans with similar risk
characteristics that merit review on a pooled
basis. Examiners generally should discuss or classify the
loans not on an individual basis but as a pool, and apply the
findings and conclusions to the entire Group. Examiners
may use multiple Groups to focus on the adequacy of credit
underwriting and administration practices or to address
different risk attributes in stratified segments. The Group
sample may be appropriate for specific categories of
homogeneous retail consumer credit, such as automobile,
credit card, or residential mortgage loans.
Adjusting Loan Review
The EIC has the flexibility, after communicating with the
case manager and receiving concurrence of field
management, to adjust the loan review sample at any point
during the examination based on findings. The rationale for
significant changes in the examination plan will be clearly
communicated to institution management, along with any
adjustments to the breadth or depth of procedures,
personnel, and examination schedule.
Accepting an Institution’s Internal Ratings
If the institution’s internal grading system (watch list) is
determined to be accurate and reliable, examiners can use
the institution’s data for preparing the applicable
examination report pages and schedules, for determining the
overall level of classifications, and for providing supporting
comments regarding the quality of the loan portfolio.
Loan Penetration Ratio
The FDIC has not established any minimum or maximum
loan penetration ratios.
The objectives for loan review on an examination include
an analysis of credit quality through transaction testing and
an assessment of credit administration practices. Achieving
a specific loan penetration ratio is not to be the driving
factor in determining the loan review sample. Rather,
examiners should focus on reviewing a sufficient number of
loans in various segments of the portfolio to assess overall
risk in the portfolio and to support examination findings,
and then calculate the resultant loan penetration ratio for
informational purposes only and enter the ratio in the
Summary Analysis of Examination Report.
Large Bank Loan Review
In addition to point-in-time examinations conducted at most
community banks, the FDIC utilizes targeted loan reviews
conducted under a supervisory plan, guiding a continuous
examination program for certain institutions. These
targeted programs are generally warranted to ensure
effective monitoring and examination activity related to
larger and more complex institutions. While the
supervisory plan and continuous examination processes and
procedures may differ in some respects from the point in
time approach, the principles contained in the preceding
loan review instructions are applicable to examination
activities for all institutions supervised by the FDIC.

LOAN EVALUATION AND
CLASSIFICATION
Loan Evaluation
To properly analyze any credit, an examiner must acquire
certain fundamental information about a borrower's
financial condition, purpose and terms of the borrowing,
and prospects for its orderly repayment. The process
involved in acquiring the foregoing information will
necessarily vary with the type and sophistication of records
utilized by the institution.
Review of Files and Records
Commercial loan liability ledgers or comparable subsidiary
records vary greatly in quality and detail. Generally, they
will provide the borrower's total commercial loan liability
to the institution, and the postings thereto will depict a
history of the debt. Collateral records should be scrutinized
to acquire the necessary descriptive information and to
 
  

ascertain that the collateral held to secure the notes is as
transcribed.
Gathering credit information is an important process and
should be done with care to obtain the essential information,
which will enable the examiner to appraise the loans
accurately and fairly. Failure to obtain and record pertinent
information contained in the credit files can reflect
unfavorably on examiners, and a good deal of examiner and
loan officer time can be saved by carefully analyzing the
files. Ideally, credit files will also contain important
correspondence between the institution and the borrower.
However, this is not universally the case; in some instances,
important correspondence is deliberately lodged in separate
files because of its sensitive character. Correspondence
between the institution and the borrower can be especially
valuable to the examiner in developing added insight into
the status of problem credits.
Verification of loan proceeds is one of the most valuable
and effective loan examining techniques available to the
examiner and often one of the most ignored. This
verification process can disclose fraudulent or fictitious
notes, misapplication of funds, loans made for the benefit or
accommodation of parties other than the borrower of record,
or utilization of loans for purposes other than those reflected
in the institution's files. Verification of the disbursement of
a selected group of large or unusual loans, particularly those
subject to classification or Special Mention and those
granted under circumstances which appear illogical or
incongruous is important. However, it is more important to
carry the verification process one step further to the
apparent utilization of loan proceeds as reflected by the
customer's deposit account or other related institution
records. The examiner should also determine the purpose
of the credit and the expected source of repayment.
Examination Procedures regarding loan portfolio analysis
are included in the ED Modules.
Additional Transaction Testing
Part of the assessment of loan administration practices
includes transaction testing. Such testing can verify that the
institution’s written policies and practices are implemented
as intended. Testing can also be useful in detecting potential
fraudulent or irregular activity. In particular, examiners are
required to verify a sample of loans that paid off during or
just prior to the on-site portion of the examination. Such
verification would include reviewing the loan file, payoff
tickets, and tracing the source of funds for the payoff.
Loan Discussion
The examiner must comprehensively review all data
collected on the individual loans. In most banks, this review
should allow the majority of loans to be passed without
criticism, eliminating the need for discussing these lines
with the appropriate institution officer(s). No matter how
thoroughly the supporting loan files have been reviewed,
there will invariably be a number of loans which will require
additional information or discussion before an appropriate
judgment can be made as to their credit quality, relationship
to other loans, proper documentation, or other
circumstances related to the overall examination of the loan
portfolio. Such loans require discussion with the
appropriate institution officer(s) as do other loans for which
adequate information has been assembled to indicate that
classification or Special Mention is warranted.
Proper preparation for the loan discussion is essential, and
the following points should be given due consideration by
the examiner. Loans which have been narrowed down for
discussion should be reviewed in depth to insure a
comprehensive grasp of all factual material. Careful
advance preparation can save time for all concerned.
Particularly with regard to large, complicated lines, undue
reliance should not be placed on memory to cover important
points in loan discussion. Important weaknesses and salient
points to be covered in discussion, questions to be asked,
and information to be sought should be noted. The loan
discussion should not involve discussion of trivialities since
the banker's time is valuable, and it is no place for
antagonistic remarks and snide comments directed at loan
officers. The examiner should listen carefully to what the
banker has to say, and concisely and accurately note this
information. Failure to do so can result in inaccuracies and
make follow-up at the next examination more difficult.
Loan Analysis
In the evaluation of individual loans, the examiner should
weigh carefully the information obtained and arrive at a
judgment as to the credit quality of the loans under review.
Each loan is appraised on the basis of its own
characteristics. Consideration is given to the risk involved
in the project being financed; the nature and degree of
collateral security; the character, capacity, financial
responsibility, and record of the borrower; and the
feasibility and probability of its orderly liquidation in
accordance with specified terms. The willingness and
ability of a debtor to perform as agreed remains the primary
measure of a loan’s risk. This implies that the borrower
must have earnings or liquid assets sufficient to meet
interest payments and provide for reduction or liquidation
of principal as agreed at a reasonable and foreseeable date.
However, it does not mean that borrowers must at all times
be in a position to liquidate their loans, for that would defeat
the original purpose of extending credit.
Following analysis of specific credits, it is important that the
examiner ascertain whether troublesome loans result from
 
  

inadequate lending and collection policies and practices or
merely reflect exceptions to basically sound credit policies
and practices. In instances where troublesome loans exist
due to ineffective lending practices and/or inadequate
supervision, it is quite possible that existing problems will
go uncorrected and further loan quality deterioration may
occur. Therefore, the examiner should not only identify
problem loans, but also ascertain the cause(s) of these
problems. Weaknesses in lending policies or practices
should be stressed, along with possible corrective measures,
in discussions with the institution's senior management
and/or the directorate and in the Report of Examination.
Loan Classification
To quantify and communicate the results of the loan review,
the examiner must arrive at a decision as to which loans are
to be subjected to criticism and/or comment in the
examination report. Adversely classified loans are allocated
on the basis of risk to three categories: Substandard;
Doubtful; and Loss.
Other loans of questionable quality, but involving
insufficient risk to warrant classification, are designated as
Special Mention loans. Loans lacking technical or legal
support, whether or not adversely classified, should be
brought to the attention of the institution's management. If
the deficiencies in documentation are severe in scope or
volume, a schedule of such loans should be included in the
Report of Examination.
Loan classifications are expressions of different degrees of
a common factor, risk of nonpayment. All loans involve
some risk, but the degree varies greatly. It is incumbent
upon examiners to avoid classification of sound loans. The
practice of lending to sound businesses or individuals for
reasonable periods is a legitimate banking function.
Adverse classifications should be confined to those loans
which are unsafe for the investment of depositors' funds.
If the internal grading system is determined to be accurate
and reliable, examiners can use the institution’s data for
preparing the applicable examination report pages and
schedules, for determining the overall level of
classifications, and for providing supporting comments
regarding the quality of the loan portfolio. If the internal
classifications are overly conservative, examiners should
make appropriate adjustments and include explanations in
the report’s comments.
The Uniform Agreement on the Classification and
Appraisal of Securities Held by Depository Institutions was
issued on October 29, 2013, by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, the FDIC, and the Federal
Reserve Board. The attachment to this interagency
statement provides definitions of Substandard, Doubtful,
and Loss categories used for adversely classifying
institution assets. Amounts classified Loss should be
promptly eliminated from the institution's books.
Uniform guidelines have been established by the FDIC
regarding the Report of Exam treatment of assets classified
Doubtful. The general policy is not to require charge-off or
similar action for Doubtful classifications. Examiners
should make a statement calling for an institution to
charge-off a portion of loans classified Doubtful only when
state law or policy requires. Further, any such statement
should be clear as to the intended purpose of bringing the
institution into conformity with those state requirements.
An exception is made for formal actions under Section 8 of
the FDI Act.
A statement addressing the chargeoff of loans classified
Loss is a required comment Report of Examination when
the amount is material. Amounts classified Loss should be
promptly eliminated from the institution's books.
Definitions
• Substandard - Substandard loans are inadequately
protected by the current sound worth and paying
capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if
any. Loans so classified must have a well-defined
weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the
liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the
distinct possibility that the institution will sustain
some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected.
• Doubtful - Loans classified Doubtful have all the
weaknesses inherent in those classified Substandard
with the added characteristic that the weaknesses
make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of
currently known facts, conditions, and values, highly
questionable and improbable.
• Loss - Loans classified Loss are considered
uncollectible and of such little value that their
continuance as bankable assets is not warranted. This
classification does not mean that the loan has
absolutely no recovery or salvage value but rather it is
not practical or desirable to defer writing off this
basically worthless asset even though partial recovery
may be effected in the future.
There is a close relationship between classifications, and no
classification category should be viewed as more important
than the other. The uncollectibility aspect of Doubtful and
Loss classifications makes their segregation of obvious
importance. The function of the Substandard classification
is to indicate those loans which are unduly risky and, if
unimproved, may be a future hazard.
 
  

A complete list of adversely classified loans is to be
provided to management, either during or at the close of an
examination.
Special Mention Assets
Definition - A Special Mention asset has potential
weaknesses that deserve management's close attention. If
left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in
deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in
the institution's credit position at some future date. Special
Mention assets are not adversely classified and do not
expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse
classification.
Use of Special Mention - The Special Mention category is
not to be used as a means of avoiding a clear decision to
adversely classify an asset or pass it without critique.
Neither should it include assets listed merely “for the
record” when uncertainties and complexities, perhaps
coupled with large size, create some reservations about the
asset. If potential weaknesses warranting management’s
close attention are not identified, inclusion of such assets
in Special Mention is not justified.
Special Mention assets have characteristics that deserve
close attention. These assets pose elevated risk, but their
weaknesses do not justify an adverse classification. Weak
underwriting, administration, and/or imprudent lending
practices may be the cause for the Special Mention
designation. However, borrowers with adverse operating
trends (declining revenues or margins), ill-proportioned
balance sheet (e.g., increasing inventory without an
increase in sales, high leverage, tight liquidity), or
collateral concerns also are factors to consider when
assigning a Special Mention designation. Instances may
also be encountered where technical exceptions are a
factor in scheduling loans for Special Mention, but
examiners should not construe that assets involving less
significant technical exceptions belong in this category.
Careful identification of assets that properly belong in this
category is important in determining the extent of risk
within asset quality and providing constructive criticism
for institution management. While Special Mention assets
should not be combined with adversely classified asset
dollar totals in the Report of Examination, their level and
trend should be considered in the assessment of asset
quality and management, as appropriate. Therefore,
examiners are permitted to use ratios combining Special
Mention with adversely classified assets, but only when
used in a supplemental fashion and in conjunction with the
standard asset quality measure, adversely classified assets
ratios.
Comments on assets included on the Items Listed for
Special Mention schedule in the Report of Examination
should be drafted in a fashion similar to those for
adversely classified assets. There is no less of a
requirement upon the examiner to clearly record the
reasons why the asset is listed. The major emphasis of the
comments should be towards identifying potential
weaknesses and risks that warrant management’s close
attention.
Troubled Commercial Real Estate Loan
Classification Guidelines
Additional classification guidelines have been developed to
aid the examiner in classifying troubled commercial real
estate loans. These guidelines are intended to supplement
the uniform guidelines discussed above. After performing
an analysis and evaluation of the project, the examiner must
determine the classification of any exposure.
The following guidelines are to be applied in instances
where the obligor is devoid of other reliable means of
repayment, with support of the debt provided solely by the
project. If other types of collateral or other sources of
repayment exist, the project should be evaluated in light of
these mitigating factors.
• Substandard - Any such troubled real estate loan or
portion thereof should be classified Substandard when
well-defined weaknesses are present which jeopardize
the orderly liquidation of the debt. Well-defined
weaknesses include a project's lack of marketability,
inadequate cash flow or collateral support, failure to
complete construction on time or the project's failure
to fulfill economic expectations. They are
characterized by the distinct possibility that the
institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are
not corrected.
• Doubtful - Doubtful classifications have all the
weaknesses inherent in those classified Substandard
with the added characteristic that the weaknesses
make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of
currently known facts, conditions and values, highly
questionable and improbable. A Doubtful
classification may be appropriate in cases where
significant risk exposures are perceived, but Loss
cannot be determined because of specific reasonable
pending factors which may strengthen the credit in the
near term. Examiners should attempt to identify Loss
in the credit where possible thereby limiting the
excessive use of the Doubtful classification.
• Loss - Advances in excess of calculated current fair
value which are considered uncollectible and do not
warrant continuance as bankable assets. There is little
 
  

or no prospect for near term improvement and no
realistic strengthening action of significance pending.
Technical Exceptions
Deficiencies in documentation of loans should be brought
to the attention of management for remedial action. Failure
of management to effect corrections may lead to the
development of greater credit risk in the future. Moreover,
an excessive number of technical exceptions may be a
reflection on management's quality and ability. Inclusion of
the schedule "Assets With Credit Data or Collateral
Documentation Exceptions" and various comments in the
Report of Examination is appropriate in certain
circumstances. Refer to the Report of Examination
Instructions for further guidance.
Past Due and Nonaccrual
Overdue loans are not necessarily subject to adverse
criticism. Nevertheless, a high volume of overdue loans
almost always indicates liberal credit standards, weak
servicing practices, or both. Because loan renewal and
extension policies vary among banks, comparison of their
delinquency ratios may be misleading. A more significant
method of evaluating this factor lies in determination of the
trend within the institution under examination, keeping in
mind the distortion resulting from seasonal influences,
economic conditions, or the timing of examinations. It is
important for the examiner to carefully consider the makeup
and reasons for the volume of overdue loans. Only then can
it be determined whether the volume of past due paper is a
significant factor reflecting adversely on the quality or
soundness of the overall loan portfolio or the efficiency and
quality of management. It is important that overdue loans
be computed on a uniform basis. This allows for
comparison of overdue totals between examinations and/or
with other banks.
The Report of Examination includes information on
overdue and nonaccrual loans. Loans which are still
accruing interest but are past their maturity or on which
either interest or principal is due and unpaid (including
unplanned overdrafts) are separated by loan type into two
distinct groupings: 30 to 89 days past due and 90 days or
more past due. Nonaccrual loans may include both current
and past due loans. In the case of installment credit, a loan
will not be considered overdue until at least two monthly
payments are delinquent. The same will apply to real estate
mortgage loans, term loans or any other loans payable on
regular monthly installments of principal and interest.
Some modification of the overdue criteria may be necessary
because of applicable state law, joint examinations, or
unusual circumstances surrounding certain kinds of loans or
in individual loan situations. It will always be necessary for
the examiner to ascertain the institution's renewal and
extension policies and procedures for collecting interest
prior to determining which loans are overdue, since such
practices often vary considerably from institution to
institution. This is important not only to validate which
loans are actually overdue, but also to evaluate the
soundness of such policies. Standards for renewal should
be aimed at achieving an orderly liquidation of loans and
not at maintaining a low ratio of past due paper through
unwarranted extensions or renewals.
In larger departmentalized banks or banks with large branch
systems, it may be informative to analyze delinquencies by
determining the source of overdue loans by department or
branch. This is particularly true if a large volume of overdue
loans exist. The production of schedules delineating
overdue loans by department or branch is encouraged if it
will aid in pinpointing the source of a problem or be
otherwise informative.
Continuing to accrue income on assets which are in default
as to principal and interest overstates an institution's assets,
earnings, and capital. Call Report Instructions indicate that
where the period of default of principal or interest equals or
exceeds 90 days, the accruing of income should be
discontinued unless the asset is well-secured and in process
of collection. A debt is well-secured if collateralized by
liens on or pledges of real or personal property, including
securities that have a realizable value sufficient to discharge
the debt in full; or by the guarantee of a financially
responsible party. A debt is in process of collection if
collection is proceeding in due course either through legal
action, including judgment enforcement procedures, or, in
appropriate circumstances, through collection efforts not
involving legal action which are reasonably expected to
result in repayment of the debt or its restoration to a current
status. Institutions are strongly encouraged to follow this
guideline not only for reporting purposes but also
bookkeeping purposes. There are several exceptions,
modifications and clarifications to this general standard.
First, consumer loans and real estate loans secured by
one-to-four family residential properties are exempt from
the nonaccrual guidelines. Nonetheless, these exempt loans
should be subject to other alternative methods of evaluation
to assure the institution's net income is not materially
overstated. Second, any state statute, regulation or rule
which imposes more stringent standards for nonaccrual of
interest should take precedence over these instructions.
Third, reversal of previously accrued but uncollected
interest applicable to any asset placed in a nonaccrual status,
and treatment of subsequent payments as either principal or
interest, should be handled in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. Acceptable accounting
treatment includes reversal of all previously accrued but
 
 

uncollected interest against appropriate income and balance
sheet accounts.
Nonaccrual Loans That Have Demonstrated
Sustained Contractual Performance
The following information applies to borrowers who have
resumed paying the full amount of scheduled contractual
interest and principal payments on loans that are past due
and in nonaccrual status. Although a prior arrearage may
not have been eliminated by payments from a borrower, the
borrower may have demonstrated sustained performance
over a period of time in accordance with the contractual
terms. Such loans to be returned to accrual status, even
though the loans have not been brought fully current,
provided two criteria are met:
• All principal and interest amounts contractually due
(including arrearage) are reasonably assured of
repayment within a reasonable period, and
• There is a sustained period of repayment performance
(generally a minimum of six months) by the borrower,
in accordance with the contractual terms involving
payments of cash or cash equivalents.
When the regulatory reporting criteria for restoration to
accrual status are met, previous charge-offs taken would not
have to be fully recovered before such loans are returned to
accrual status. Loans that meet the above criteria would
continue to be disclosed as past due, as appropriate, until
they have been brought fully current.
Troubled Debt Restructuring - Multiple Note
Structure
The basic example of a trouble debt restructuring (TDR)
multiple note structure is a troubled loan that is restructured
into two notes where the first or "A" note represents the
portion of the original loan principal amount which is
expected to be fully collected along with contractual
interest. The second part of the restructured loan, or "B"
note, represents the portion of the original loan that has been
charged-off.
Such TDRs generally may take any of three forms. In
certain TDRs, the "B" note may be a contingent receivable
that is payable only if certain conditions are met (e.g.,
sufficient cash flow from property). For other TDRs, the
"B" note may be contingently forgiven (e.g., note "B" is
forgiven if note "A" is paid in full). In other instances, an
institution would have granted a concession (e.g., rate
reduction) to the troubled borrower, but the "B" note would
remain a contractual obligation of the borrower. Because
the "B" note is not reflected as an asset on the institution's
books and is unlikely to be collected, for reporting purposes
the "B" note could be viewed as a contingent receivable.
Institutions may return the "A" note to accrual status
provided the following conditions are met:
• The restructuring qualifies as a TDR as defined by
ASC Subtopic 310-40, Receivables – Troubled Debt
Restructurings by Creditors and there is economic
substance to the restructuring.
• The portion of the original loan represented by the "B"
note has been charged-off. The charge-off must be
supported by a current, well-documented credit
evaluation of the borrower's financial condition and
prospects for repayment under the revised terms. The
charge-off must be recorded before or at the time of
the restructuring.
• The "A" note is reasonably assured of repayment and
of performance in accordance with the modified
terms.
• In general, the borrower must have demonstrated
sustained repayment performance (either immediately
before or after the restructuring) in accordance with
the modified terms for a reasonable period prior to the
date on which the "A" note is returned to accrual
status. A sustained period of payment performance
generally would be a minimum of six months and
involve payments in the form of cash or cash
equivalents.
Under existing reporting requirements, the "A" note would
be disclosed as a TDR. In accordance with these
requirements, if the "A" note yields a market rate of interest
and performs in accordance with the restructured terms,
such disclosures could be eliminated in the year following
restructuring. To be considered a market rate of interest, the
interest rate on the "A" note at the time of restructuring must
be equal to or greater than the rate that the institution is
willing to accept for a new receivable with comparable risk.
Interagency Retail Credit Classification
Policy
The quality of consumer credit soundness is best indicated
by the repayment performance demonstrated by the
borrower. Because retail credit generally is comprised of a
large number of relatively small balance loans, evaluating
the quality of the retail credit portfolio on a loan-by-loan
basis is burdensome for the institution being examined and
examiners. To promote an efficient and consistent credit
risk evaluation, the FDIC, the Comptroller of Currency, the
Federal Reserve and the former Office of Thrift Supervision
adopted the Uniform Retail Credit Classification and
Account Management Policy (Retail Classification Policy.)
 
  

Retail credit includes open-end and closed-end credit
extended to individuals for household, family, and other
personal expenditures. It includes consumer loans and
credit cards. For purposes of the policy, retail credit also
includes loans to individuals secured by their personal
residence, including home equity and home improvement
loans.
In general, retail credit should be classified based on the
following criteria:
• Open-end and closed-end retail loans past due 90
cumulative days from the contractual due date should
be classified Substandard.
• Closed-end retail loans that become past due 120
cumulative days and open-end retail loans that
become past due 180 cumulative days from the
contractual due date should be charged-off. The
charge-off should be taken by the end of the month in
which the 120-or 180-day time period elapses.
• Unless the institution can clearly demonstrate and
document that repayment on accounts in bankruptcy is
likely to occur, accounts in bankruptcy should be
charged off within 60 days of receipt of notification of
filing from the bankruptcy court or within the
delinquency time frames specified in this
classification policy, whichever is shorter. The
charge-off should be taken by the end of the month in
which the applicable time period elapses. Any loan
balance not charged-off should be classified
Substandard until the borrower re-establishes the
ability and willingness to repay (with demonstrated
payment performance for six months at a minimum)
or there is a receipt of proceeds from liquidation of
collateral.
• Fraudulent loans should be charged off within 90 days
of discovery or within the delinquency time frames
specified in this classification policy, whichever is
shorter. The charge-off should be taken by the end of
the month in which the applicable time period elapses.
• Loans of deceased persons should be charged off
when the loss is determined or within the delinquency
time frames adopted in this classification policy,
whichever is shorter. The charge-off should be taken
by the end of the month in which the applicable time
period elapses.
• One-to-four family residential real estate loans and
home equity loans that are delinquent 90 days or more
with loan-to-value ratios greater than 60 percent,
should be classified Substandard.
When an open- or closed-end residential or home equity
loan is 180 days past due, a current assessment of value
should be made and any outstanding loan balance in excess
of the fair value of the property, less cost to sell, should be
classified Loss.
Properly secured residential real estate loans with loan-tovalue ratios equal to or less than 60 percent are generally not
classified based solely on delinquency status. Home equity
loans to the same borrower at the same institution as the
senior mortgage loan with a combined loan-to-value ratio
equal to or less than 60 percent should not be classified.
However, home equity loans where the institution does not
hold the senior mortgage, that are delinquent 90 days or
more should be classified Substandard, even if the loan-tovalue ratio is equal to, or less than, 60 percent.
If an institution can clearly document that the delinquent
loan is well secured and in the process of collection, such
that collection will occur regardless of delinquency status,
then the loan need not be classified. A well secured loan is
collateralized by a perfected security interest in, or pledges
of, real or personal property, including securities, with an
estimated fair value, less cost to sell, sufficient to recover
the recorded investment in the loan, as well as a reasonable
return on that amount. In the process of collection means
that either a collection effort or legal action is proceeding
and is reasonably expected to result in recovery of the loan
balance or its restoration to a current status, generally within
the next 90 days.
This policy does not preclude an institution from adopting
an internal classification policy more conservative than the
one detailed above. It also does not preclude a regulatory
agency from using the Doubtful or Loss classification in
certain situations if a rating more severe than Substandard
is justified. Loss in retail credit should be recognized when
the institution becomes aware of the loss, but in no case
should the charge-off exceed the time frames stated in this
policy.
Re-aging, Extensions, Deferrals, Renewals, or Rewrites
Re-aging is the practice of bringing a delinquent account
current after the borrower has demonstrated a renewed
willingness and ability to repay the loan by making some,
but not all, past due payments. Re-aging of open-end
accounts, or extensions, deferrals, renewals, or rewrites of
closed-end accounts should only be used to help borrowers
overcome temporary financial difficulties, such as loss of
job, medical emergency, or change in family circumstances
like loss of a family member. A permissive policy on reagings, extensions, deferrals, renewals, or rewrites can
cloud the true performance and delinquency status of the
portfolio. However, prudent use of a policy is acceptable
when it is based on recent, satisfactory performance and the
true improvement in a borrower's other credit factors, and
when it is structured in accordance with internal policies.
 
  

The decision to re-age a loan, like any other modification of
contractual terms, should be supported in the institution's
management information systems. Adequate management
information systems usually identify and document any loan
that is extended, deferred, renewed, or rewritten, including
the number of times such action has been taken.
Documentation normally shows that institution personnel
communicated with the borrower, the borrower agreed to
pay the loan in full, and the borrower shows the ability to
repay the loan.
Institutions that re-age open-end accounts should establish
a reasonable written policy and adhere to it. An account
eligible for re-aging, extension, deferral, renewal, or rewrite
should exhibit the following:
• The borrower should show a renewed willingness and
ability to repay the loan.
• The account should exist for at least nine months
before allowing a re-aging, extension, renewal,
referral, or rewrite.
• The borrower should make at least three minimum
consecutive monthly payments or the equivalent lump
sum payment before an account is re-aged. Funds
may not be advanced by the institution for this
purpose.
• No loan should be re-aged, extended, deferred,
renewed, or rewritten more than once within any
twelve-month period; that is, at least twelve months
must have elapsed since a prior re-aging. In addition,
no loan should be re-aged, extended, deferred,
renewed, or rewritten more than two times within any
five-year period.
• For open-end credit, an over limit account may be reaged at its outstanding balance (including the over
limit balance, interest, and fees). No new credit may
be extended to the borrower until the balance falls
below the designated predelinquency credit limit.
Partial Payments on Open-End and Closed-End Credit
Institutions should use one of two methods to recognize
partial payments. A payment equivalent to 90 percent or
more of the contractual payment may be considered a full
payment in computing delinquency. Alternatively, the
institution may aggregate payments and give credit for any
partial payment received. For example, if a regular
installment payment is $300 and the borrower makes
payments of only $150 per month for a six-month period,
the loan would be $900, or three full months delinquent. An
institution may use either or both methods in its portfolio,
but may not use both methods simultaneously with a single
loan.
Examination Considerations
Examiners should determine whether institutions’ policies
and practices consider the Retail Classification Policy,
understanding that there may be instances that warrant
exceptions to the general classification policy. Loans need
not be classified if the institution can document clearly that
repayment will occur regardless of delinquency status.
Examples might include loans well secured by marketable
collateral and in the process of collection, loans for which
claims are filed against solvent estates, and loans supported
by valid insurance claims. Conversely, the Retail
Classification Policy does not preclude examiners from
reviewing and classifying individual large dollar retail
credit loans that exhibit signs of credit weakness regardless
of delinquency status.
In addition to reviewing loan classifications, the examiner
should review the ALLL to assess whether it is at an
appropriate level. Sound risk and account management
systems typically include:
• Prudent retail credit lending policies,
• Measures to monitor adherence to policy,
• Detailed operating procedures, and
• Appropriate internal controls.
Institutions lacking sound policies or failing to implement
or effectively follow established policies will be subject to
criticism.
Examination Treatment
Use of the formula classification approach can result in
numerous small dollar adversely classified items. Although
these classification details are not always included in the
Report of Examination, an itemized list is to be left with
management. A copy of the listing should also be retained
in the examination work papers.
Examiner support packages are available which have built
in parameters of the formula classification policy, and
which generate a listing of delinquent consumer loans to be
classified in accordance with the policy. Use of this
package may expedite the examination in certain cases,
especially in larger banks.
Losses are one of the costs of doing business in consumer
installment credit departments. It is important for the
examiner to give consideration to the amount and severity
of installment loan charge-offs when examining the
department. Excessive loan losses are the product of weak
lending and collection policies and therefore provide a good
indication of the soundness of the consumer installment
loan operation. The examiner should be alert also to the
absence of installment loan charge-offs, which may indicate
that losses are being deferred or concealed through
unwarranted rewrites or extensions.
 
  

Dealer lines should be scheduled in the report under the
dealer's name regardless of whether the contracts are
accepted with or without recourse. Any classification or
totaling of the nonrecourse line can be separately identified
from the direct or indirect liability of the dealer. Comments
and format for scheduling the indirect contracts will be
essentially the same as for direct paper. If there is direct
debt, comments will necessarily have to be more extensive
and probably will help form a basis for the indirect
classification.
No general rule can be established as to the proper
application of dealers' reserves to the examiner's
classifications. Such a rule would be impractical because of
the many methods used by banks in setting up such reserves
and the various dealer agreements utilized. Generally,
where the institution is handling a dealer who is not
financially responsible, weak contracts warrant
classification irrespective of any balance in the dealer's
reserve. Fair and reasonable judgment on the part of the
examiner will determine application of dealer reserves.
If the amount involved would have a material impact on
capital, consumer loans should be classified net of unearned
income. Large business-type loans placed in consumer
installment loan departments should receive individual
review and, in all cases, the applicable unearned income
discount should be deducted when such loans are classified.
Impaired Loans, Troubled Debt
Restructurings, Foreclosures, and
Repossessions
Loan Impairment – The accounting standard for impaired
loans is ASC Subtopic 310-10. A loan is impaired when,
based on current information and events, it is probable that
an institution will be unable to collect all amounts due
according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement
(i.e., principal and interest). Impaired loans encompass all
loans that are restructured in a troubled debt restructuring,
including smaller balance homogenous loans that are
typically exempt from ASC Subtopic 310-10. However, the
standard does not include loans that are measured at fair
value or the lower of cost or fair value.
When a loan is impaired under ASC Subtopic 310-10, the
amount of impairment should be measured based on the
present value of expected future cash flows discounted at
the loan’s effective interest rate (i.e., the contractual interest
rate adjusted for any net deferred loan fees or costs and
premium or discount existing at the origination or
acquisition of the loan). As a practical expedient,
impairment may also be measured based on a loan’s
observable market price. The fair value of the collateral
must be used if the loan is collateral dependent. An
impaired loan is collateral dependent if repayment would be
expected to be provided solely by the sale or continued
operation of the underlying collateral.
If the measure of a loan calculated in accordance with ASC
Subtopic 310-10 is less than the recorded investment in the
loan (typically the face amount of the loan, plus accrued
interest, adjusted for any premium or discount, deferred fee
or cost, less any charge-offs), impairment on that loan
should be recognized as a part of the ALLL. In general,
when the amount of the recorded investment in the loan
exceeds the amount calculated under ASC Subtopic 310-10
and that amount is determined to be uncollectible, this
excess amount should be promptly charged-off against the
ALLL. In all cases, when an impaired loan is collateral
dependent and the repayment of the loan is expected from
the sale of the collateral, any portion of the recorded
investment in the loan in excess of the fair value less cost to
sell of the collateral should be charged-off.
Troubled Debt Restructuring - The accounting for TDRs
is set forth in ASC Subtopic 310-40, Receivables-Troubled
Debt Restructurings by Creditors. A restructuring
constitutes a troubled debt restructuring if the institution for
economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s
financial difficulties grants a concession to the borrower
that it would not otherwise consider. A troubled debt
restructuring takes place when an institution grants a
concession to a debtor in financial difficulty. Examiners are
expected to reflect all TDRs in examination reports in
accordance with this accounting guidance and institutions
are expected to follow these principles when filing the Call
Report.
TDRs may be divided into two broad groups: those where
the borrower transfers assets to the creditor in full or partial
satisfaction of the debt, which would include foreclosures;
and those in which the terms of a debtor’s obligation are
modified, which may include reduction in the stated interest
rate to an interest rate that is less than the current market
rate for new obligations with similar risk, extension of the
maturity date, or forgiveness of principal or interest. A third
type of restructuring combines a receipt of assets and a
modification of loan terms. A loan extended or renewed at
an interest rate equal to the current market interest rate for
new debt with similar risk is not reported as a restructured
loan for examination purposes.
Transfer of Assets to the Creditor - An institution that
receives assets (except long-lived assets that will be sold)
from a borrower in full satisfaction of the recorded
investment in the loan should record those assets at fair
value. If the fair value of the assets received is less than the
institution’s recorded investment in the loan, a loss is
charged to the ALLL. When property is received in full
 
  

satisfaction of an asset other than a loan (e.g., a debt
security), the loss should be reflected in a manner consistent
with the balance sheet classification of the asset satisfied.
When long-lived assets that will be sold, such as real estate,
are received in full satisfaction of a loan, the real estate is
recorded at its fair value less cost to sell. This fair value
(less cost to sell) becomes the “cost” of the foreclosed asset.
To illustrate, assume an institution forecloses on a defaulted
mortgage loan of $100,000 and takes title to the property. If
the fair value of the property at the time of foreclosure is
$90,000 and costs to sell are estimated at $10,000, a $20,000
loss should be immediately recognized by a charge to the
ALLL. The cost of the foreclosed asset becomes $80,000.
If the institution is on an accrual basis of accounting, there
may also be adjusting entries necessary to reduce both the
accrued interest receivable and loan interest income
accounts. Assume further that in order to effect sale of the
realty to a third party, the institution is willing to offer a new
mortgage loan (e.g., of $100,000) at a concessionary rate of
interest (e.g., 10 percent while the market interest rate for
new loans with similar risk is 20 percent). Before booking
this new transaction, the institution must establish its
"economic value" or what would be the cash price paid.
Pursuant to ASC Subtopic 835-30, Interest – Imputation of
Interest, the value is represented by the sum of the present
value of the income stream to be received from the new
loan, discounted at the current market interest rate for this
type of credit, and the present value of the principal to be
received, also discounted at the current market interest rate.
This economic value (calculated by discounting the cash
flows at the current market interest rate) becomes the proper
carrying value for the property at its sale date. Since the
sales price of $78,000 is less than the property’s carrying
amount of $80,000), an additional loss has been incurred
and should be immediately recognized. This additional loss
should be reflected in the allowance if a relatively brief
period has elapsed between foreclosure and subsequent
resale of the property. However, the loss should be treated
as loss on the sale of real estate if the asset has been held for
a longer period. The new loan would be placed on the books
at its face value ($100,000) and the difference between the
new loan amount and the "economic value" ($78,000) is
treated as unearned discount ($22,000). For examination
and Call Report purposes, the asset would be shown net of
the unearned discount which is reduced periodically as it is
earned over the life of the new loan. The $22,000 discount
is accreted into interest income over the life of the loan as
long as the loan remains in accrual status.
The basis for this accounting approach is the assumption
that financing the resale of the property at a concessionary
rate exacts an opportunity cost which the institution must
recognize. That is, unearned discount represents the present
value of the "imputed" interest differential between the
concessionary and market rates of interest. Present value
accounting also assumes that both the institution and the
third party who purchased the property are indifferent to a
cash sales price at the "economic value" or a higher financed
price repayable over time.
Modification of Terms - When the terms of a TDR provide
for a reduction of interest or principal, the institution should
measure any loss on the restructuring in accordance with the
guidance for impaired loans as set forth in ASC Subtopic
310-10 unless the loans are measured at fair value or the
lower of cost or fair value. The amount of impairment of
the restructured loan using the appropriate measurement
method in ASC Subtopic 310-10 is reported as a component
in determining the overall ALLL. If any amount of the
calculated impairment is determined to be uncollectible,
that amount should be promptly charged-off against the
ALLL.
For example, in lieu of foreclosure, an institution chooses to
restructure a $100,000 loan to a borrower which had
originally been granted with an interest rate of 10 percent
for 10 years. The institution and the borrower have agreed
to capitalize the accrued interest ($10,000) into the note
balance, but the restructured terms will permit the borrower
to repay the debt over 10 years at a six percent interest rate.
The institution does not believe the loan is collateral
dependent. In this situation, the institution would determine
the amount of impairment on the TDR as the difference
between the present value of the expected cash flows
discounted at the 10 percent rate specified in the original
contract and the recorded investment in loan of $110,000.
This amount of the calculated impairment becomes a
component of the overall ALLL.
Combination Approach - In some instances, the institution
may receive assets in partial rather than full satisfaction of
a loan or security and may also agree to alter the original
repayment terms. In these cases, the recorded investment in
the loan should be reduced by the fair value of the assets
received (less cost to sell, if appropriate). The remaining
recorded investment in the loan is accounted for as a TDR.
Examination Report Treatment - Examiners should
continue to classify TDRs, including any impaired collateral
dependent loans, based on the definitions of Loss, Doubtful,
and Substandard. When an impaired loan is collateral
dependent and the loan is expected to be satisfied by the sale
of the collateral, any portion of the recorded investment in
the loan which exceeds the fair value of the collateral, less
cost to sell is the amount of impairment included in the
ALLL. This is the amount of Loss on that loan that should
be promptly charged-off. For other loans that are impaired
loans, the amount of the recorded investment in the loan
over the amount of the calculated impairment is recognized
as a component of the ALLL. However, when available
information confirms that loans and leases (including any
 
  

recorded accrued interest, net deferred loan fees or costs,
and unamortized premium or discount) other than impaired
collateral dependent loans (dependent on the sale of the
collateral), or portions thereof, are uncollectible, these
amounts should be promptly charged-off against the ALLL.
An examiner should not require an additional allowance for
credit losses of impaired loans over and above what is
calculated in accordance with these standards. An additional
allowance on impaired loans may be supported based on
consideration of institution-specific factors, such as
historical loss experience compared with estimates of such
losses and concerns about the reliability of cash flow
estimates, the quality of an institution’s loan review
function, and controls over its process for estimating its
ASC Subtopic 310-10 allowance.
Other Considerations - Examiners may encounter
situations where impaired loans and TDRs are identified,
but the institution has not properly accounted for the
transactions. Where incorrect accounting treatment resulted
in an overstatement of earnings, capital and assets, it will be
necessary to determine the proper carrying values for these
assets, utilizing the best available information developed by
the examiner after consultation with institution
management. Nonetheless, proper accounting for impaired
loans and TDRs is the responsibility of institution
management. Examiners should not spend a
disproportionate amount of time developing the appropriate
accounting entries, but instead discuss with and require
corrective action by institution management when the
institution’s treatment is not in accordance with accepted
accounting guidelines. It must also be emphasized that
collectibility and proper accounting and reporting are
separate matters; restructuring a borrower’s debt does not
ensure collection of the loan or security. As with all other
assets, adverse classification should be assigned if analysis
indicates there is risk of loss present. Examiners should take
care, however, not to discourage or be critical of institution
management’s legitimate and reasonable attempts to
achieve debt settlements through concessionary terms. In
many cases, restructurings offer the only realistic means for
an institution to bring about collection of weak or
nonearning assets. Finally, the volume of impaired loans
and restructured debts having concessionary interest rates
should be considered when evaluating the institution’s
earnings performance and assigning the earnings
performance rating.
Examination procedures for reviewing TDRs are included
in the ED Modules.
Report of Examination Treatment of
Classified Loans
The Items Subject to Adverse Classification page allows an
examiner to present pertinent and readily understandable
comments related to loans which are adversely classified.
In addition, the Analysis of Loans Subject to Adverse
Classification page permits analysis of present and previous
classifications from the standpoint of source and
disposition. These loan schedules should be prepared in
accordance with the Report of Examination Instructions.
An examiner must present, in writing, relevant and readily
understandable comments related to criticized loans.
Therefore, a thorough understanding of all factors
surrounding the loan is required and only those germane to
description, collectibility, and management plans should be
included in the comments. Comments should be concise,
but brevity is not to be accomplished by omission of
appropriate information. Comments should be informative
and factual data emphasized. The important weaknesses of
the loan should not be overshadowed by extraneous
information which might well have been omitted. An
ineffective presentation of a classified loan weakens the
value of a Report of Examination and frequently casts doubt
on the accuracy of the classifications. The essential test of
loan comments is whether they justify the classification.
Careful organization is an important ingredient of good loan
comments. Generally, loan comments should include the
following items:
• Identification - Indicate the name and occupation or
type of business of the borrower. Cosigners,
endorsers and guarantors should be identified and in
the case of business loans, it should be clear whether
the borrower is a corporation, partnership, or sole
proprietorship.
• Description - The make-up of the debt should be
concisely described as to type of loan, amount, origin
and terms. The history, purpose, and source of
repayment should also be indicated.
• Collateral - Describe and evaluate any collateral,
indicating the marketability and/or condition thereof.
If values are estimated, note the source.
• Financial Data - Current balance sheet information
along with operating figures should be presented, if
such data are considered necessary. The examiner
must exercise judgment as to whether a statement
should be detailed in its entirety. When the statement
is relevant to the classification, it is generally more
effective to summarize weaknesses with the entire
statement presented. On the other hand, if the
statement does not significantly support or detract
from the loan, a very brief summarization of the
statement is in order.
• Summarize the Problem - The examiner's comments
should explicitly point out reasons for the
classification. Where portions of the line are accorded
 
  

different classifications or are not subject to
classification, comments should clearly set forth the
reasoning for the split treatment.
• Management's Intentions - Comments should
include any corrective program contemplated by
management.
Examiners should avoid arbitrary or penalty classifications,
nor should "conceded" or "agreed" be given as the principal
reason for adverse classifications. Management's opinions
and ideas should not have to be emphasized; if a
classification is well-founded, the facts will speak for
themselves. If well-written, there is little need for long
summary comments reemphasizing major points of the loan
write-up.
When the volume of loan classifications reaches the point
of causing supervisory concern, analysis of present and
previous classifications from the standpoint of source and
disposition becomes very important. For this reason, the
Analysis of Loans Subject to Adverse Classification page
should be completed in banks possessing characteristics
which present special supervisory problems; when the
volume or composition of adversely classified loans has
changed significantly since the previous examination,
including both upward and downward movements; and, in
such other special or unusual situations as examiners deem
appropriate. Generally, the page should not include
consumer loans and overdrafts and it should be footnoted to
indicate that these assets are not included.
Issuance of "Express Determination" Letters
to Institutions for Federal Income Tax
Purposes
Tax Rules - The Internal Revenue Code and tax regulations
allow a deduction for a loan that becomes wholly or partially
worthless. All pertinent evidence is taken into account in
determining worthlessness. Special tax rules permit a
federally supervised depository institution to elect a method
of accounting under which it conforms its tax accounting for
bad debts to its regulatory accounting for loan charge-offs,
provided certain conditions are satisfied. Under these rules,
loans that are charged-off pursuant to specific orders of the
institution's supervisory authority or that are classified by
the institution as Loss assets under applicable regulatory
standards are conclusively presumed to have become
worthless in the taxable year of the charge-offs.
To be eligible for this accounting method for tax purposes,
an institution must file a conformity election with its federal
income tax return. The tax regulations also require the
institution's primary federal supervisory authority to
expressly determine that the institution maintains and
applies loan loss classification standards that are consistent
with the regulatory standards of its supervisory authority.
An institution must request an “express determination"
letter before making the election. To continue using the taxbook conformity method, the institution must request a new
letter at each subsequent examination that covers the loan
review process. If the examiner does not issue an "express
determination" letter at the end of such an examination, the
institution's election of the tax-book conformity method is
revoked automatically as of the beginning of the taxable
year that includes the date of examination. However, that
examiner's decision not to issue an "express determination"
letter does not invalidate an institution's election for any
prior years. The supervisory authority is not required to
rescind any previously issued "express determination"
letters.
When an examiner does not issue an "express
determination" letter, the institution is still allowed tax
deductions for loans that are wholly or partially worthless.
However, the burden of proof is placed on the institution to
support its tax deductions for loan charge-offs.
Examination Guidelines - Institutions are responsible for
requesting "express determination" letters during
examinations that cover their loan review process, i.e.,
during safety and soundness examinations. Examiners
should not alter the scope or frequency of examinations
merely to permit banks to use the tax-book conformity
method.
When requested by an institution that has made or intends
to make the election under Section 1.166-2(d)(3) of the tax
regulations, the examiner-in-charge should issue an
"express determination" letter, provided the institution does
maintain and apply loan loss classification standards that are
consistent with the FDIC's regulatory standards. The letter
should only be issued at the completion of a safety and
soundness examination at which the examiner-in-charge has
concluded that the issuance of the letter is appropriate.
An "express determination" letter should be issued to an
institution only if:
• The examination indicates that the institution
maintains and applies loan loss classification
standards that are consistent with the FDIC's standards
regarding the identification and charge-off of such
loans; and
• There are no material deviations from the FDIC's
standards.
Minor criticisms of the institution's loan review process as
it relates to loan charge-offs or immaterial individual
 
  

deviations from the FDIC's standards should not preclude
the issuance of an "express determination" letter.
An "express determination" letter should not be issued if:
• The institution's loan review process relating to
charge-offs is subject to significant criticism;
• Loan charge-offs reported in the Report of Condition
and Income (Call Reports) are consistently overstated
or understated; or
• There is a pattern of loan charge-offs not being
recognized in the appropriate year.
When the issuance of an "express determination" letter is
appropriate, it should be prepared on FDIC letterhead using
the following format. The letter should be signed and dated
by the examiner-in-charge and provided to the institution
for its files. The letter is not part of the Report of
Examination.
Express Determination Letter for IRS Regulation 1.166-
2(d)(3)
“In connection with the most recent examination of [Name
of Bank], by the , as
of [examination date], we reviewed the institution’s loan
review process as it relates to loan charge-offs. Based on
our review, we concluded that the institution, as of that date,
maintained and applied loan loss classification standards
that were consistent with regulatory standards regarding
loan charge-offs.
This statement is made on the basis of a review that was
conducted in accordance with our normal examination
procedures and criteria. It does not in any way limit or
preclude any formal or informal supervisory action
(including enforcement actions) by this supervisory
authority relating to the institution’s loan review process or
the level at which it maintains its allowance for loan and
lease losses.
[signature]
Examiner-in-charge
[date signed]
When an "express determination" letter is issued to an
institution, a copy of the letter as well as documentation of
the work performed by examiners in their review of the
institution's loan loss classification standards should be
maintained in the workpapers. A copy of the letter should
also be forwarded to the regional office with the Report of
Examination. The issuance of an “express determination”
letter should be noted in the Report of Examination
according to procedure in the Report of Examination
Instructions. An express determination letter should not be
issued subsequent to the Report of Examination being
finalized and distributed to the institution.
When an examiner-in-charge concludes that the conditions
for issuing a requested "express determination" letter have
not been met, the examiner-in-charge should discuss the
reasons for this conclusion with the regional office. The
examiner-in-charge should then advise institution
management that the letter cannot be issued and explain the
basis for this conclusion. A comment indicating that a
requested "express determination" letter could not be
issued, together with a brief statement of the reasons for not
issuing the letter are addressed in the Report of Examination
Instructions.

CONCENTRATIONS
Generally a concentration is a significantly large volume of
economically-related assets that an institution has advanced
or committed to one person, entity, or affiliated group.
These assets may in the aggregate present a substantial risk
to the safety and soundness of the institution. Adequate
diversification of risk allows the institution to avoid the
excessive risks imposed by credit concentrations. It should
also be recognized, however, that factors such as location
and economic environment of the area limit some
institutions' ability to diversify. Where reasonable
diversification realistically cannot be achieved, the resultant
concentration calls for capital levels higher than the
regulatory minimums.
Concentrations generally are not inherently bad, but do add
a dimension of risk which the management of the institution
should consider when formulating plans and policies. In
formulating these policies, management typically addresses
goals for portfolio mix and limits within the loan and other
asset categories. The institution's business strategy,
management expertise and location should be considered
when reviewing the policy. Management should also
consider the need to track and monitor the economic and
financial condition of specific geographic locations,
industries and groups of borrowers in which the institution
has invested heavily. All concentrations should be
monitored closely by management and receive a more
in-depth review than the diversified portions of the
institution's assets. Failure to monitor concentrations can
result in management being unaware how significant
economic events might impact the overall portfolio. This
will also allow management to consider areas where
concentration reductions may be necessary. Management
and the board can monitor any reduction program using
accurate concentration reports. If management is not
properly monitoring concentration levels and limits,
examiners may consider criticizing management.
 
 

To establish a meaningful tracking system for
concentrations of credit, financial institutions should be
encouraged to consider the use of codes to track individual
borrowers, related groups of borrowers, industries, and
individual foreign countries. Financial institutions should
also be encouraged to use the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) or similar code to track
industry concentrations. Any monitoring program should
be reported regularly to the board of directors.
Refer to the Report of Examination Instructions for
guidance in identifying and listing concentrations in the
examination report.

FEDERAL FUNDS SOLD AND
REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS
Federal funds sold and securities purchased under
agreement for resale represent convenient methods to
employ excess funds to enhance earnings. Federal funds are
excess reserve balances and take the form of a one-day
transfer of funds between banks. These funds carry a
specified rate of interest and are free of the risk of loss due
to fluctuations in market prices entailed in buying and
selling securities. However, these transactions are usually
unsecured and therefore do entail potential credit risk.
Securities purchased under agreement for resale represent
an agreement between the buying and selling banks that
stipulates the selling institution will buy back the securities
sold at an agreed price at the expiration of a specified period
of time.
Federal funds sold are not "risk free" as is often supposed,
and the examiner will need to recognize the elements of risk
involved in such transactions. While the selling of funds is
on a one-day basis, these transactions may evolve into a
continuing situation. This development is usually the result
of liability management techniques whereby the buying
institution attempts to utilize the acquired funds to support
a rapid expansion of its loan-investment posture and as a
means of enhancing profits. Of particular concern to the
examiner is that, in many cases, the selling institution will
automatically conclude that the buying institution's
financial condition is above reproach without proper
investigation and analysis. If this becomes the case, the
selling institution may be taking an unacceptable risk
unknowingly.
Another area of potential risk involves selling federal funds
to an institution which may be acting as an intermediary
between the selling institution and the ultimate buying
institution. In this instance, the intermediary institution is
acting as agent with the true liability for repayment accruing
to the third institution. Therefore, it is particularly
important that the original selling institution be aware of this
situation, ascertain the ultimate disposition of its funds, and
be satisfied as to the creditworthiness of the ultimate buyer
of the funds.
Clearly, the "risk free" philosophy regarding the sale of
federal funds is inappropriate. Selling banks must take the
necessary steps to assure protection of their position. The
examiner is charged with the responsibility of ascertaining
that selling banks have implemented and adhered to policy
directives in this regard to forestall any potentially
hazardous situations.
Examiners should encourage management of banks
engaged in selling federal funds to implement a policy with
respect to such activity. This policy generally would
consider matters such as the aggregate sum to be sold at any
one time, the maximum amount to be sold to any one buyer,
the maximum duration of time the institution will sell to any
one buyer, a list of acceptable buyers, and the terms under
which a sale will be made. As in any form of lending,
thorough credit evaluation of the prospective purchaser,
both before granting the credit extension and on a
continuing basis, is a necessity. Such credit analysis
emphasizes the borrower's ability to repay, the source of
repayment, and alternative sources of repayment should the
primary source fail to materialize. While sales of federal
funds are normally unsecured unless otherwise regulated by
state statutes, and while collateral protection is no substitute
for thorough credit review, it is prudent for the selling
institution to consider the possibility of requiring security if
sales agreements are entered into on a continuing basis for
specific but extended periods of time, or for overnight
transactions which have evolved into longer term sales.
Where the decision is made to sell federal funds on an
unsecured basis, the selling institution should be able to
present logical reasons for such action based on conclusions
drawn from its credit analysis of the buyer and bearing in
mind the potential risk involved.
A review of federal funds sold between examinations may
prompt examiners to broaden the scope of their analysis of
such activity if the transactions are not being handled in
accordance with sound practices as outlined above. Where
the institution has not developed a formal policy regarding
the sale of federal funds or fails to conduct a credit analysis
of the buyer prior to a sale and during a continuous sale of
such funds, the matter should be discussed with
management. In such discussion, it is incumbent upon
examiners to inform management that their remarks are not
intended to cast doubt upon the financial strength of any
institution to whom federal funds are sold. Rather, the intent
is to advise the banker of the potential risks of such practices
unless safeguards are developed. The need for policy
formulation and credit review on all Federal funds sold
should be reinforced via a comment in the Report of
Examination. Also, if federal funds sold to any one buyer
 
  

equals or exceeds 100 percent of the selling institution's Tier
1 Capital, it should be listed on the Concentrations schedule
unless secured by U.S. Government securities. Based on the
circumstances, the examiner should determine the
appropriateness of additional comments regarding risk
diversification.
Securities purchased under an agreement to resell are
generally purchased at prevailing market rates of interest.
The purchasing institution must keep in mind that the
transaction merely represents another form of lending.
Therefore, considerations normally associated with granting
secured credit should be made. Repayment or repurchases
by the selling institution is a major consideration, and the
buying institution should satisfy itself that the selling
institution will be able to generate the necessary funds to
repurchase the securities on the prescribed date. Policy
guidelines typically limit the amount of money extended to
one seller. Collateral coverage arrangements should be
controlled by procedures similar to the safeguards used to
control any type of liquid collateral. Securities held under
such an arrangement should not be included in the
institution's investment portfolio but should be reflected in
the Report of Examination under the caption Securities
Purchased Under Agreements to Resell. Transactions of
this nature do not require entries to the securities account of
either institution with the selling institution continuing to
collect all interest and transmit such payments to the buying
institution.
Assessing Bank-to-Bank Credit
Because of the FDIC’s regulatory role, examiners often
possess confidential information concerning a bank
obligated on unsecured lines, Federal funds, or subordinated
notes and debentures to another bank under examination.
The files of the bank under examination may contain
insufficient information to make an informed assessment of
the credit. When this is the case, and when there is
information in the public domain to suggest that the line
involves more than a normal degree of risk, the matter
should be brought to the attention of management and the
board of the bank under examination.
However, if the bank’s credit files or public record contain
sufficient information to justify adverse classification of the
debt, then it should be classified in the report of
examination.
The following is a statement regarding such credits which
may be used in applicable situations:
The foregoing obligation of a federally insured banking
institution is listed for special mention because of publicly
available information which suggests the obligation
contains risk which is some degree greater than normal. The
following is a standard statement of the FDIC's position
regarding such credits.
"In reviewing bank-to-bank debt, the FDIC is placed in a
position of basic conflict. We may or may not be in
possession of confidential information arising from our
regulatory function with respect to the other institution. The
responsibility for properly appraising the assets of the bank
under examination in such an instance may suggest the need
to disclose adverse information, while the implied
arrangement under which we received the information
would preclude us, in good faith, from making the
disclosure. It is our policy, in view of the foregoing, not to
classify such credits adversely except where we can support
the classification without the use of information gathered
solely through privileged sources. Rather, we bring the
existence of this credit to the board's attention for whatever
review or other action it believes consistent with its sworn
responsibilities to the stockholders and depositors of the
bank under examination."

FUNDAMENTAL LEGAL CONCEPTS AND
DEFINITIONS
Laws and regulations that apply to credit extended by banks
are more complicated and continually in a state of change.
However, certain fundamental legal principles apply no
matter how complex or innovative a lending transaction. To
avoid needless litigation and ensure that each loan is a
legally enforceable claim against the borrower or collateral,
adherence to certain rules and prudent practices relating to
loan transactions and documentation is essential. An
important objective of the examiner's analysis of collateral
and credit files is not only to obtain information about the
loan, but also to determine if proper documentation
procedures and practices are being utilized. While
examiners are not expected to be experts on legal matters, it
is important they be familiar with the Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC) adopted by their respective states as well as
other applicable state laws governing credit transactions. A
good working knowledge of the various documents
necessary to attain the desired collateral or secured position,
and how those documents are to be used or handled in the
jurisdiction relevant to the institution under examination, is
also essential.
Uniform Commercial Code – Secured
Transactions
Article 9 of the UCC governs secured transactions; i.e.,
those transactions which create a security interest in
personal property or fixtures including goods, documents,
instruments, general intangibles, chattel paper or accounts.
Article 9 was significantly revised effective July 1, 2001,
 
  

but each individual state must adopt the changes for it to
become law. Because some states have enacted modified
versions of the UCC and subsequent revisions, each
applicable state statute should be consulted.
General Provisions
A Security Agreement is an agreement between a debtor and
a secured party that creates or provides for a security
interest. The Debtor is the person that has an interest in the
collateral other than a security interest. The term Debtor
also includes a seller of payment intangibles or promissory
notes. The obligor is the person who owes on a secured
transaction. The Secured Party is the lender, seller or other
person in whose favor there is a security interest.
Grant of Security Interest
For a security interest to be enforceable against the debtor
or third party with respect to the collateral, the collateral
must be in the possession of the secured party pursuant to
agreement, or the debtor must sign a security agreement
which covers the description of the collateral.
Collateral
Any description of personal property or real estate is a
sufficient description of the collateral whether or not it is
specific if it reasonably identifies what is described. If the
parties seek to include property acquired after the signing of
the security agreement as collateral, additional requirements
must be met.
Unless otherwise agreed a security agreement gives the
secured party the rights to proceeds from the sale, exchange,
collection or disposition of the collateral.
In some cases, the collateral that secures an obligation under
one security agreement can be used to secure a new loan,
too. This can be done by using a cross-collateralization
clause in the security agreement.
Perfecting the Security Interest
Three terms basic to secured transactions are attachment,
security agreement and security interest. Attachment refers
to that point when the creditor's legal rights in the debtor's
property come into existence or "attach.” This does not
mean the creditor necessarily takes physical possession of
the property, or does it mean acquisition of ownership of the
property. Rather, it means that before attachment, the
borrower's property is free of any legal encumbrance, but
after attachment, the property is legally bound by the
creditor's security interest. In order for the creditor's
security interest to attach, there must be a security
agreement in which the debtor authenticates and provides a
description of the collateral. A creditor's security interest
can be possessory or nonpossessory, a secured party with
possession pursuant to “agreement” means that the
“agreement” for possession has to be an agreement that the
person will have possession for purposes of security. The
general rule is an institution must take possession of deposit
accounts (proprietary), letter of credit rights, electronic
chattel, paper, stocks and bonds to perfect a security interest
therein. In a transaction involving a nonpossessory security
interest, the debtor retains possession of the collateral. A
security interest in collateral automatically attaches to the
proceeds of the collateral and is automatically perfected in
the proceeds if the credit was advanced to enable the
purchase
A party's security interest in personal property is not
protected against a debtor's other creditors unless it has been
perfected. A security interest is perfected when it has
attached and when all of the applicable steps required for
perfection, such as the filing of a financing statement or
possession of the collateral, have been taken. These
provisions are designed to give notice to others of the
secured party's interest in the collateral, and offer the
secured party the first opportunity at the collateral if the
need to foreclose should arise. If the security interest is not
perfected, the secured party loses its secured status.
Right to Possess and Dispose of Collateral
Unless otherwise agreed, when a debtor defaults on a
secured loan, a secured party has the right to take possession
of the collateral without going to court if this can be done
without breaching the peace. Alternatively, if the security
agreement so provides, the secured party may require the
debtor to assemble the collateral and make it available to the
secured party at a place to be designated by the secured
party which is reasonably convenient to both parties.
A secured party may then sell, lease or otherwise dispose of
the collateral with the proceeds applied as follows: (a)
foreclosure expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees
and legal expenses; (b) the satisfaction of indebtedness
secured by the secured party's security interest in the
collateral; and (c) the satisfaction of indebtedness secured
by any subordinate security interest in the collateral if the
secured party receives written notification of demand before
the distribution of the proceeds is completed. If requested
by the secured party, the holder of a subordinate security
interest must furnish reasonable proof of his interest, and
unless he does so, the secured party need not comply with
his demand.
Examiners should determine institution policy concerning
the verification of lien positions prior to advancing funds.
Failure to perform this simple procedure may result in the
institution unknowingly assuming a junior lien position and,
thereby, greater potential loss exposure. Management may
 
 

check filing records personally or a lien search may be
performed by the filing authority or other responsible party.
This is especially important when the institution grants new
credit lines.
Agricultural Liens
An agricultural lien is generally defined as an interest, other
than a security interest, in farm products that meets the
following three conditions:
• The lien secures payment or performance of an
obligation for goods or services furnished in
connection with a debtor’s farming operation or rent
on real property leased by a debtor in connection with
its farming operation.
• The lien is created by statute in favor of a person that
in the ordinary course of its business furnished goods
or services to a debtor in connection with a debtor’s
farming operation or leased property to a debtor in
connection with the debtor’s farming operation.
• The lien’s effectiveness does not depend on the
person’s possession of the personal property.
An agricultural lien is therefore non-possessory. Law
outside of UCC-9 governs creation of agricultural liens and
their attachment to collateral. An agricultural lien cannot be
created or attached under Article 9. Article 9, however,
does govern perfection. In order to perfect an agricultural
lien, a financing statement must be filed. A perfected
agricultural lien on collateral has priority over a conflicting
security interest in or agricultural lien on the same collateral
if the statute creating the agricultural lien provides for such
priority. Otherwise, the agricultural lien is subject to the
same priority rules as security interests (for example, date
of filing).
A distinction is made with respect to proceeds of collateral
for security interests and agricultural liens. For security
interests, collateral includes the proceeds under Article 9.
For agricultural liens, the collateral does not include
proceeds unless state law creating the agricultural lien gives
the secured party a lien on proceeds of the collateral subject
to the lien.
Special Filing Requirements – There is a national uniform
Filing System form. Filers, however are not required to use
them. If permitted by the filing office, parties may file and
otherwise communicate by means of records communicated
and stored in a media other than paper. A peculiarity
common to all states is the filing of a lien on aircraft; the
security agreement must be submitted to the Federal
Aviation Administration in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
Default and Foreclosure - As a secured party, an
institution's rights in collateral only come into play when the
obligor is in default. What constitutes default varies
according to the specific provisions of each promissory
note, loan agreement, security agreement, or other related
documents. After an obligor has defaulted, the creditor
usually has the right to foreclose, which means the creditor
seizes the security pledged to the loan, sells it and applies
the proceeds to the unpaid balance of the loan. For
consumer transactions, there are strict consumer notification
requirements prior to disposition of the collateral. For
consumer transactions, the lender must provide the debtor
with certain information regarding the surplus or deficiency
in the disposition of collateral. There may be more than one
creditor claiming a right to the sale proceeds in foreclosure
situations. When this occurs, priority is generally
established as follows: (1) Creditors with a perfected
security interest (in the order in which lien perfection was
attained); (2) Creditors with an unperfected security
interest; and (3) General creditors.
Under the UCC procedure for foreclosing security interests,
four concepts are involved. First is repossession or taking
physical possession of the collateral, which may be
accomplished with judicial process or without judicial
process (known as self-help repossession), so long as the
creditor commits no breach of the peace. The former is
usually initiated by a replevin action in which the sheriff
seizes the collateral under court order. A second important
concept of UCC foreclosure procedures is redemption or the
debtor's right to redeem the security after it has been
repossessed. Generally, the borrower must pay the entire
balance of the debt plus all expenses incurred by the
institution in repossessing and holding the collateral. The
third concept is retention that allows the institution to retain
the collateral in return for releasing the debtor from all
further liability on the loan. The borrower must agree to this
action, hence would likely be so motivated only when the
value of the security is likely to be less than or about equal
to the outstanding debt. Finally, if retention is not agreeable
to both borrower and lender, the fourth concept, resale of
the security, comes into play. Although sale of the collateral
may be public or private, notice to the debtor and other
secured parties must generally be given. The sale must be
commercially reasonable in all respects. Debtors are
entitled to any surplus resulting from sale price of the
collateral less any unpaid debt. If a deficiency occurs (i.e.,
the proceeds from sale of the collateral were inadequate to
fully extinguish the debt obligation), the institution has the
right to sue the borrower for this shortfall. This is a right it
does not have under the retention concept.
Exceptions to the Rule of Priority - There are three
exceptions to the general rule that the creditor with the
earliest perfected security interest has priority. The first
concerns a specific secured transaction in which a creditor
makes a loan to a dealer and takes a security interest in the
dealer's inventory. Suppose such a creditor files a financing
 
  

statement with the appropriate public official to perfect the
security interest. While it might be possible for the dealer's
customers to determine if an outstanding security interest
already exists against the inventory, it would be impractical
to do so. Therefore, an exception is made to the general rule
and provides that a buyer in the ordinary course of business,
i.e., an innocent purchaser for value who buys in the normal
manner, cuts off a prior perfected security interest in the
collateral.
The second exception to the rule of priority concerns the
vulnerability of security interests perfected by doing
nothing. While these interests are perfected automatically,
with the date of perfection being the date of attachment, they
are extremely vulnerable at the hands of subsequent bona
fide purchasers. Suppose, for example, a dealer sells a
television set on a secured basis to an ultimate consumer.
Since the collateral is consumer goods, the security interest
is perfected the moment if attaches. But if the original buyer
sells the television set to another person who buys it in good
faith and in ignorance of the outstanding security interest,
the UCC provides that the subsequent purchase cuts off the
dealer's security interest. This second exception is much the
same as the first except for one important difference: the
dealer (creditor) in this case can be protected against
purchase of a customer's collateral by filing a financing
statement with the appropriate public official.
The third exception regards the after-acquired property
clause that protects the value of the collateral in which the
creditor has a perfected security interest. The after-acquired
property clause ordinarily gives the original creditor senior
priority over creditors with later perfected interests.
However, it is waived as regards the creditor who supplies
replacements or additions to the collateral or the artisan who
supplies materials and services that enhance the value of the
collateral as long as a perfected security interest in the
replacement or additions, or collateral is held.
Borrowing Authorization
Borrowing authorizations in essence permit one party to
incur liability for another. In the context of lending, this
usually concerns corporations. A corporation may enter
into contracts within the scope of the powers authorized by
its charter. In order to make binding contracts on behalf of
the corporation, the officers must be authorized to do so
either by the board of directors or by expressed or implied
general powers. Usually a special resolution expressly
gives certain officers the right to obligate the corporate
entity, pledge assets as collateral, agree to other terms of the
indebtedness and sign all necessary documentation on
behalf of the corporate entity.
Although a general resolution is perhaps satisfactory for the
short-term, unsecured borrowings of a corporation, a
specific resolution of the corporation's board of directors is
generally advisable to authorize such transactions as term
loans, loans secured by security interests in the corporation's
personal property, or mortgages on real estate. Further,
mortgaging or pledging substantially all of the corporation's
assets without prior approval of the shareholders of the
corporation is often prohibited, therefore, an institution may
need to seek advice of counsel to determine if shareholder
consent is required for certain contemplated transactions.
Loans to corporations should indicate on their face that the
corporation is the borrower. The corporate name should
appear followed by the name, title and signature of the
appropriate officer. If the writing is a negotiable instrument,
the UCC states the party signing is personally liable as a
general rule. To enforce payment against a corporation, the
note or other writing should clearly show that the debtor is
a corporation.
Bond and Stock Powers
As mentioned previously, an institution generally obtains a
security interest in stocks and bonds by possession. The
documents which allow the institution to sell the securities
if the borrower defaults are called stock powers and bond
powers. The examiner should ensure the institution has, for
each borrower who has pledged stocks or bonds, one signed
stock power for all stock certificates of a single issuer, and
a separate signed bond power for each bond instrument.
The signature must agree with the name on the actual stock
certificate or bond instrument. Refer to Federal Reserve
Board Regulations Part 221 (Reg U) for further information
on loans secured by investment securities.
Co-maker
Two or more persons who are parties to a contract or
promise to pay are known as co-makers. They are a unit to
the performance of one act and are considered primarily
liable. In the case of default on an unsecured loan, a
judgment would be obtained against all. A release against
one is a release against all because there is but one
obligation and if that obligation is released as to one obligor,
it is released as to all others.
Loan Guarantee
Since banks often condition credit advances upon the
backup support provided by third party guarantees,
examiners should understand the legal fundamentals
governing guarantees. A guarantee may be a guarantee of
payment or of collection. "Payment guaranteed" or
equivalent words added to a signature means that if the
instrument is not paid when due, the guarantor will pay it
according to its terms without resort by the holder to any
 
  

other party. "Collection guaranteed" or equivalent words
added to a signature means that if the instrument is not paid
when due, the guarantor will pay it, but only after the holder
has reduced to judgment a claim against the maker and
execution has been returned unsatisfied, or after the maker
has become insolvent or it is otherwise useless to proceed
against such a party.
Contracts of guarantee are further divided into a limited
guarantee which relates to a specific note (often referred to
as an "endorsement") or for a fixed period of time, or a
continuing guarantee which, in contrast, is represented by a
separate instrument and enforceable for future (duration
depends upon state law) transactions between the institution
and the borrower or until revoked. A well-drawn continuing
guarantee contains language substantially similar to the
following: "This is an absolute and unconditional guarantee
of payment, is unconditionally delivered, and is not subject
to the procurement of a guarantee from any person other
than the undersigned, or to the performance or happening of
any other condition." The aforementioned unambiguous
terms are necessary to the enforceability of contracts of
guarantee, as they are frequently entered into solely as an
accommodation for the borrower and without the
guarantor's participation in the benefits of the loan. Thus,
courts tend to construe contracts of guarantee strictly
against the party claiming under the contract. Unless the
guarantee is given prior to or at the time the initial loan is
made, the guarantee may not be enforceable because of the
difficulty of establishing that consideration was given.
Institutions should not disburse funds on such loans until
they have the executed guarantee agreement in their
possession. Institutions should also require the guarantee be
signed in the presence of the loan officer, or, alternatively,
that the guarantor's signature be notarized. If the proposed
guarantor is a partnership, joint venture, or corporation, the
examiner should ensure the signing party has the legal
authority to enter into the guarantee agreement. Whenever
there is a question concerning a corporation's authority to
guarantee a loan, counsel should be consulted and a special
corporate resolution passed by the organization's board of
directors.
Subordination Agreement
An institution extending credit to a closely held corporation
may want to have the company's officers and shareholders
subordinate to the institution's loan any indebtedness owed
them by the corporation. This is accomplished by execution
of a subordination agreement by the officers and
shareholders. Subordination agreements are also commonly
referred to as standby agreements. Their basic purpose is to
prevent diversion of funds from reduction of institution debt
to reduction of advances made by the firm's owners or
officers.
Hypothecation Agreement
This is an agreement whereby the owner of property grants
a security interest in collateral to the institution to secure the
indebtedness of a third party. Institutions often take
possession of the stock certificates, plus stock powers
endorsed in blank, in lieu of a hypothecation agreement.
Caution, however, dictates that the institution take a
hypothecation agreement setting forth the institution's rights
in the event of default.
Real Estate Mortgage
A mortgage may be defined as a conveyance of realty given
with the intention of providing security for the payment of
debt. There are several different types of mortgage
instruments but those commonly encountered are regular
mortgages, deeds of trust, equitable mortgages, and deeds
absolute given as security.
Regular Mortgages - The regular mortgage involves only
two parties, the borrower and the lender. The mortgage
document encountered in many states today is referred to as
the regular mortgage. It is, in form, a deed or conveyance
of realty by the borrower to the lender followed or preceded
by a description of the debt and the property, and includes a
provision to the effect that the mortgage be released upon
full payment of the debt. Content of additional paragraphs
and provisions varies considerably.
Deeds of Trust - In the trust deed, also known as the deed
of trust, the borrower conveys the realty not to the lender
but to a third party, a trustee, in trust for the benefit of the
holder of the notes(s) that constitutes the mortgage debt.
The deed of trust form of mortgage has certain advantages,
the principle being that in a number of states it can be
foreclosed by trustee's sale under the power of sale clause
without court proceedings.
Equitable Mortgages - As a general rule, any instrument in
writing by which the parties show their intention that realty
be held as security for the payment of a debt, constitutes an
equitable mortgage capable of being foreclosed in a court of
equity.
Deeds Absolute Given as Security - Landowners who
borrow money may give as security an absolute deed to the
land. "Absolute deed" means a quitclaim or warranty deed
such as is used in an ordinary realty sale. On its face, the
transaction appears to be a sale of the realty; however, the
courts treat such a deed as a mortgage where the evidence
shows that the instrument was really intended only as
security for a debt. If such proof is available, the borrower
is entitled to pay the debt and demand reconveyance from
the lender, as in the case of an ordinary mortgage. If the
 
  

debt is not paid, the grantee must foreclose as if a regular
mortgage had been made.
The examiner should determine whether the institution has
performed a title and lien search of the property prior to
taking a mortgage or advancing funds. Proper procedure
calls for an abstractor bringing the abstract up to date, and
review of the abstract by an attorney or title insurance
company. If an attorney performs the task, the abstract will
be examined and an opinion prepared indicating with whom
title rests, along with any defects and encumbrances
disclosed by the abstract. Like an abstractor, an attorney is
liable only for damages caused by negligence. If a title
insurance company performs the task of reviewing the
abstract, it does essentially the same thing; however, when
title insurance is obtained, it represents a contract to make
good, loss arising through defects in title to real estate or
liens or encumbrances thereon. Title insurance covers
various items not covered in an abstract and title opinion.
Some of the more common are errors by abstractors or
attorneys include unauthorized corporate action, mistaken
legal interpretations, and unintentional errors in public
records by public officials. Once the institution determines
title and lien status of the property, the mortgage can be
prepared and funds advanced. The institution should record
the mortgage immediately after closing the loan. Form,
execution, and recording of mortgages vary from state to
state and therefore must conform to the requirements of
state law.
Collateral Assignment
An assignment is generally considered as the transfer of a
legal right from one person to another. The rights acquired
under a contract may be assigned if they relate to money or
property, but personal services may not be assigned.
Collateral assignments are used to establish the institution's
rights as lender in the property or asset serving as collateral.
It is generally used for loans secured by savings deposits,
certificates of deposit or other cash accounts as well as loans
backed by cash surrender value of life insurance. In some
instances, it is used in financing accounts receivable and
contracts. If a third party holder of the collateral is involved,
such as life insurance company or the payor of an assigned
contract, an acknowledgement should be obtained from that
party as to the institution's assigned interest in the asset for
collateral purposes.

CONSIDERATION OF BANKRUPTCY
LAW AS IT RELATES TO
COLLECTIBILITY OF A DEBT
Introduction
Familiarity with the basic terms and concepts of the federal
bankruptcy law (formally known as the Bankruptcy Reform
Act of 1978) is necessary in order for examiners to make
informed judgments concerning the likelihood of collection
of loans to bankrupt individuals or organizations. The
following paragraphs present an overview of the subject.
Complex situations may arise where more in-depth
consideration of the bankruptcy provisions may be
necessary and warrant consultation with the institution's
attorney, regional counsel or other member of the regional
office staff. For the most part, however, knowledge of the
following information when coupled with review of credit
file data and discussion with institution management should
enable examiners to reach sound conclusions as to the
eventual repayment of the institution's loans.
Forms of Bankruptcy Relief
Liquidation and rehabilitation are the two basic types of
bankruptcy proceedings. Liquidation is pursued under
Chapter 7 of the law and involves the bankruptcy trustee
collecting all of the debtor's nonexempt property,
converting it into cash and distributing the proceeds among
the debtor's creditors. In return, the debtor obtains a
discharge of all debts outstanding at the time the petition
was filed which releases the debtor from all liability for
those pre-bankruptcy debts.
Rehabilitation (sometimes known as reorganization) is
effected through Chapter 11 or Chapter 13 of the law and in
essence provides that creditors' claims are satisfied not via
liquidation of the obligor's assets but rather from future
earnings. That is, debtors are allowed to retain their assets
but their obligations are restructured and a plan is
implemented whereby creditors may be paid.
Chapter 11 bankruptcy is available to all debtors, whether
individuals, corporations or partnerships. Chapter 13
(sometimes referred to as the "wage earner plan"), on the
other hand, may be used only by individuals with regular
incomes and when their unsecured debts are under $100,000
and secured debts less than $350,000. The aforementioned
rehabilitation plan is essentially a contract between the
debtor and the creditors. Before the plan may be confirmed,
the bankruptcy court must find it has been proposed in good
faith and that creditors will receive an amount at least equal
to what would be received in a Chapter 7 proceeding. In
Chapter 11 reorganization, all creditors are entitled to vote
on whether or not to accept the repayment plan. In Chapter
13 proceedings, only secured creditors are so entitled. A
majority vote binds the minority to the plan, provided the
latter will receive pursuant to the plan at least the amount
they would have received in a straight liquidation. The plan
is fashioned so that it may be carried out in three years
although the court may extend this to five years.
 
  

Most cases in bankruptcy courts are Chapter 7 proceedings,
but reorganization cases are increasingly common. From
the creditor's point of view, Chapter 11 or 13 filings
generally result in greater debt recovery than do liquidation
situations under Chapter 7. Nonetheless, the fact that
reorganization plans are tailored to the facts and
circumstances applicable to each bankrupt situation means
that they vary considerably and the amount recovered by the
creditor may similarly vary from nominal to virtually
complete recovery.
Functions of Bankruptcy Trustees
Trustees are selected by the borrower's creditors and are
responsible for administering the affairs of the bankrupt
debtor's estate. The bankrupt's property may be viewed as
a trust for the benefit of the creditors, consequently it
follows the latter should, through their elected
representatives, exercise substantial control over this
property.
Voluntary and Involuntary Bankruptcy
When a debtor files a bankruptcy petition with the court, the
case is described as a voluntary one. It is not necessary the
individual or organization be insolvent in order to file a
voluntary case. Creditors may also file a petition, in which
case the proceeding is known as an involuntary bankruptcy.
However, this alternative applies only to Chapter 7 cases
and the debtor generally must be insolvent, i.e., unable to
pay debts as they mature, in order for an involuntary
bankruptcy to be filed.
Automatic Stay
Filing of the bankruptcy petition requires (with limited
exceptions) creditors to stop or "stay" further action to
collect their claims or enforce their liens or judgements.
Actions to accelerate, set off or otherwise collect the debt
are prohibited once the petition is filed, as are
post- bankruptcy contacts with the obligor. The stay
remains in effect until the debtor's property is released from
the estate, the bankruptcy case is dismissed, the debtor
obtains or is denied a discharge, or the bankruptcy court
approves a creditor's request for termination of the stay.
Two of the more important grounds applicable to secured
creditors under which they may request termination are as
follows: (1) The debtor has no equity in the encumbered
property, and the property is not necessary to an effective
rehabilitation plan; or (2) The creditor's interest in the
secured property is not adequately protected. In the latter
case, the law provides three methods by which the creditor's
interests may be adequately protected: the creditor may
receive periodic payments equal to the decrease in value of
the creditor's interest in the collateral; an additional or
substitute lien on other property may be obtained; or some
other protection is arranged (e.g., a guarantee by a third
party) to adequately safeguard the creditor's interests. If
these alternatives result in the secured creditor being
adequately protected, relief from the automatic stay will not
be granted. If relief from the stay is obtained, creditors may
continue to press their claims upon the bankrupt's property
free from interference by the debtor or the bankruptcy court.
Property of the Estate
When a borrower files a bankruptcy petition, an "estate" is
created and, under Chapter 7 of the law, the property of the
estate is passed to the trustee for distribution to the creditors.
Certain of the debtor's property is exempt from distribution
under all provisions of the law (not just Chapter 7), as
follows: homeowner's equity up to $7,500; automobile
equity and household items up to $1,200; jewelry up to
$500; cash surrender value of life insurance up to $4,000;
Social Security benefits (unlimited); and miscellaneous
items up to $400 plus any unused portion of the
homeowner's equity. The bankruptcy code recognizes a
greater amount of exemptions may be available under state
law and, if state law is silent or unless it provides to the
contrary, the debtor is given the option of electing either the
federal or state exemptions. Examiners should note that
some liens on exempt property which would otherwise be
enforceable are rendered unenforceable by the bankruptcy.
A secured lender may thus become unsecured with respect
to the exempt property. The basic rule in these situations is
that the debtor can render unenforceable judicial liens on
any exempt property and security interests that are both
nonpurchase money and nonpossessory on certain
household goods, tools of the trade and health aids.
Discharge and Objections to Discharge
The discharge, as mentioned previously, protects the debtor
from further liability on the debts discharged. Sometimes,
however, a debtor is not discharged at all (i.e., the creditor
has successfully obtained an "objection to discharge") or is
discharged only as regards to a specific creditor(s) and a
specific debt(s) (an action known as "exception to
discharge"). The borrower obviously remains liable for all
obligations not discharged, and creditors may pursue
customary collection procedures with respect thereto.
Grounds for an "objection to discharge" include the
following actions or inactions by the bankrupt debtor (this
is not an all-inclusive list): fraudulent conveyance within 12
months of filing the petition; unjustifiable failure to keep or
preserve financial records; false oath or account or
presentation of a false claim in the bankruptcy case and
estate, respectively; withholding of books or records from
the trustee; failure to satisfactorily explain any loss or
deficiency of assets; refusal to testify when legally required
 
  

to do so; and receiving a discharge in bankruptcy within the
last six full years. Some of the bases upon which creditors
may file "exceptions to discharge" are: nonpayment of
income taxes for the three years preceding the bankruptcy;
money, property or services obtained through fraud, false
pretenses or false representation; debts not scheduled on the
bankruptcy petition and which the creditor had no notice;
alimony or child support payments (this exception may be
asserted only by the debtor's spouse or children, property
settlements are dischargeable); and submission of false or
incomplete financial statements. If an institution attempts
to seek an exception on the basis of false financial
information, it must prove the written financial statement
was materially false, it reasonably relied on the statement,
and the debtor intended to deceive the institution. These
assertions can be difficult to prove. Discharges are
unavailable to corporations or partnerships. Therefore, after
a bankruptcy, corporations and partnerships often dissolve
or become defunct.
Reaffirmation
Debtors sometimes promise their creditors after a
bankruptcy discharge that they will repay a discharged debt.
An example wherein a debtor may be so motivated involves
the home mortgage. To keep the home and discourage the
mortgagee from foreclosing, a debtor may reaffirm this
obligation. This process of reaffirmation is an agreement
enforceable through the judicial system. The law sets forth
these basic limitations on reaffirmations: the agreement
must be signed before the discharge is granted; a hearing is
held and the bankruptcy judge informs the borrower there is
no requirement to reaffirm; and the debtor has the right to
rescind the reaffirmation if such action is taken within 30
days.
Classes of Creditors
The first class of creditors is known as priority creditors. As
the name implies, these creditors are entitled to receive
payment prior to any others. Priority payments include
administrative expenses of the debtor's estate, unsecured
claims for wages and salaries up to $2,000 per person,
unsecured claims for employee benefit plans, unsecured
claims of individuals up to $900 each for deposits in
conjunction with rental or lease of property, unsecured
claims of governmental units and certain tax liabilities.
Secured creditors are only secured up to the extent of the
value of their collateral. They become unsecured in the
amount by which collateral is insufficient to satisfy the
claim. Unsecured creditors are of course the last class in
terms of priority.
Preferences
Certain actions taken by a creditor before or during
bankruptcy proceedings may be invalidated by the trustee if
they result in some creditors receiving more than their share
of the debtor's estate. These actions are called "transfers"
and fall into two categories. The first involves absolute
transfers, such as payments received by a creditor; the
trustee may invalidate this action and require the payment
be returned and made the property of the bankrupt estate. A
transfer of security, such as the granting of a mortgage, may
also be invalidated by the trustee. Hence, the trustee may
require previously encumbered property be made
unencumbered, in which case the secured party becomes an
unsecured creditor. This has obvious implications as
regards loan collectibility.
Preferences are a potentially troublesome area for banks and
examiners should have an understanding of basic principles
applicable to them. Some of the more important of these are
listed here.
• A preference may be invalidated (also known as
"avoided") if it has all of these elements: the transfer
was to or for the benefit of a creditor; the transfer was
made for or on account of a debt already outstanding;
the transfer has the effect of increasing the amount a
creditor would receive in Chapter 7 proceedings; the
transfer was made within 90 days of the bankruptcy
filing, or within one year if the transfer was to an
insider who had reasonable cause to believe the debtor
was insolvent at the time of transfer; and the debtor
was insolvent at the time of the transfer. Under
bankruptcy law, borrowers are presumed insolvent for
90 days prior to filing the bankruptcy petition.
• Payment to a fully secured creditor is not a preference
because such a transfer would not have the effect of
increasing the amount the creditor would otherwise
receive in a Chapter 7 proceeding. Payment to a
partially secured creditor does, however, have the
effect of increasing the creditor's share and is thus
deemed a preference which the trustee may avoid.
• Preference rules also apply to a transfer of a lien to
secure past debts, if the transfer has all five elements
set forth under the first point.
• There are certain situations wherein a debtor has given
a preference to a creditor but the trustee is not
permitted to invalidate it. A common example
concerns floating liens on inventory under the
Uniform Commercial Code. These matters are subject
to complex rules, however, and consultation with the
regional office may be advisable when this issue
arises.
Setoffs
 
  

Setoffs occur when a party is both a creditor and a debtor of
another; amounts which a party owes are netted against
amounts which are owed to that party. If an institution
exercises its right of setoff properly and before the
bankruptcy filing, the action is generally upheld in the
bankruptcy proceedings. Setoffs made after the bankruptcy
may also be valid but certain requirements must be met of
which the following are especially important: First, the
debts must be between the same parties in the same right
and capacity. For example, it would be improper for the
institution to setoff the debtor's loan against a checking
account of the estate of the obligor's father, of which the
debtor is executor. Second, both the debt and the deposit
must precede the bankruptcy petition filing. Third, the
setoff may be disallowed if funds were deposited in the
institution within 90 days of the bankruptcy filing and for
the purpose of creating or increasing the amount to be set
off.
Transfers Not Timely Perfected or Recorded
Under most circumstances, an institution which has not
recorded its mortgage or otherwise fails to perfect its
security interest in a proper timely manner runs great risk of
losing its security. This is a complex area of the law but
prudence clearly dictates that liens be properly obtained and
promptly filed so that the possibility of losing the protection
provided by collateral is eliminated.

SYNDICATED LENDING
Overview
Syndicated loans often represent a substantial portion of the
commercial and industrial loan portfolios of large banks. A
syndicated loan involves two or more banks contracting
with a borrower, typically a large or middle market
corporation, to provide funds at specified terms under the
same credit facility. The average commercial syndicated
credit is in excess of $100 million. Syndicated credits differ
from participation loans in that lenders participate jointly in
the origination process, as opposed to one originator selling
undivided participation interests to third parties. In a
syndicated transaction, each financial institution receives a
pro rata share of the income based on the level of
participation in the credit. Additionally, one or more
lenders take on the role of lead or agent (co-agents in the
case of more than one) of the credit and assume
responsibility of administering the loan for the other
lenders. The agent may retain varying percentages of the
credit, which is commonly referred to as the hold level.
The syndicated-lending market formed to meet basic needs
of lenders and borrowers, such as:
• Raising large amounts of money,
• Enabling geographic diversification,
• Obtaining working capital quickly and efficiently,
• Diversifying credit risk among banks, and
• Gaining attractive pricing advantages.
In times of excess liquidity in the marketplace, spreads
typically are quite narrow for investment-grade facilities,
thus making it a borrower’s market. This may be
accompanied by an easing of the structuring and covenants.
In spite of tightening margins, commercial banks are
motivated to compete regarding pricing in order to retain
other business as well as generate fee income.
Relaxing covenants and pricing may result in lenders
relying heavily on market valuations, or so-called
"enterprise values" in arriving at credit decisions. These
values are derived by applying a current-period multiple to
cash flows (which uses data from comparable companies
within the same industry), or discounting projected cash
flows over several years (which typically uses an average
cost of capital as the discount rate). This value represents
the intangible business value of a company as a going
concern, which often exceeds its underlying hard assets.
Many deals involve merger and acquisition financing.
While the primary originators of the syndicated loans are
commercial banks, most of the volume is sold and held by
other investors.
A subset of syndicated lending is leveraged lending which
refers to borrowers with an elevated level of debt and debt
service compared with cash flow. By their very nature,
these instruments are of higher risk.
Syndication Process
There are four phases in loan syndications: Pre-Launch,
Launch, Post-Launch, and Post-Closing.
The Pre-Launch Process - During this phase, the
syndicators identify the borrower’s needs and perform their
initial due diligence. Industry information is gathered and
analyzed, and background checks may be performed.
Potential pricing and structure of the transaction takes
shape. Formal credit write-ups are sent to credit officers for
review and to senior members of the syndication group for
pricing approval. Competitive bids are sent to the borrower.
The group then prepares for the launch.
An information memorandum is prepared by the agent.
This memorandum is a formal and confidential document
that should address all principal credit issues relating to the
borrower and to the project being financed. It typically
 
 

contains an overview of the transaction including a term
sheet, an overview of the borrower’s business, and quarterly
and annual certified financial statements. This document
acts as both the marketing tool and as the source of
information for the syndication.
The Launch Phase - The transaction is launched into the
market when banks are sent the information memoranda
mentioned above. Legal counsel commences to prepare the
documentation. Negotiations take place between the banks
and the borrower over pricing, collateral, covenants, and
other terms. Often there is an institution meeting so
potential participants can discuss the company’s business
and industry both with the lead agent and with the company.
Post-Launch Phase - Typically there is a two-week period
for potential participants to evaluate the transaction and to
decide whether or not to participate in the syndication.
During this period, banks do their due diligence and credit
approval. Often this entails running projection models,
including stress tests, doing business and industry research,
and presenting the transaction for the approval process once
the decision is made to commit to the transaction.
After the commitment due date, participating banks receive
a draft credit agreement for their comments. Depending
upon the complexity of the agreement, they usually have
about a week to make comments. The final credit
agreement is then negotiated based on the comments and the
loan would then close two to five days after the credit
agreement is finalized.
Post-Closing Phase - Post-Closing, there usually is an
ongoing dialogue with the borrower about
financial/operating performance as well as quarterly credit
agreement covenant compliance checks. Annually, a full
credit analysis typically is done as well as annual meetings
of the participants for updates on financial and operating
performance. Both the agent institution and the participants
need to assess the loan protection level by analyzing the
business risk as well as the financial risk. Each industry has
particular dominant risks to be assessed.
Loan Covenants
Loan covenants are special conditions included in a loan
agreement that the borrower is required to fulfill in order for
the loan agreement to remain valid. Typically, covenants
cover several domains but can broadly be divided into
financial and non-financial categories. Effective financial
covenants establish an operating framework using
conditions defined in absolute amounts or ratios. If
exceeded by the borrower, the covenants provide lenders the
opportunity to further strengthen collateral controls or
adjust interest rates. Some examples are:
Net Worth test: restricts the total amount of debt a borrower
can incur, expressed as a percentage of net worth.
Current Ratio/ Quick Ratio test: measures liquidity.
Interest, Debt Service or Fixed Charge Coverage test:
assures that some level of cash flow is generated by a
company above its interest expense and other fixed
obligations. The proxy for cash flow is usually EBITDA
(earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization).
Capital Expenditure Limitations: generally set according to
the company’s business plan and then measured
accordingly.
Borrowing Base Limitations: lending formula typically
based on eligible accounts receivable and inventory. At
times, the formula may also include real estate or other noncurrent assets.
Leverage test: actual leverage covenant levels vary by
industry segment. Typical ratios include Total Debt divided
by EBITDA, Senior Debt divided by EBITDA and Net Debt
(subtracts cash) divided by EBITDA.
Non-financial covenants may include restrictions on other
matters such as management changes, provisions of
information, guarantees, disposal of assets, etc.
Credit Rating Agencies
The large credit rating agencies (Standard and Poor’s,
Moody’s, and Fitch Investor Services) provide coverage of
many syndicated loans at origination and periodically
during the life of the loan. Credit ratings issued by these
agencies reflect a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of
financial and other information of the prospective borrower,
including information provided by the borrower and other
non-public information.
Credit ratings may represent the overall corporate credit
rating of a borrower or reflect analysis of a borrower’s
specific financial instruments, such as their syndicated
loans. Credit ratings for each financial instrument reflect
the general credit risk of the borrower, their ability to repay
the debt, and the probability of the borrower defaulting on
the instrument in question. Some credit rating agencies also
provide separate ratings that consider the financial loss the
holder of a financial instrument such as a syndicated loan
may incur if a borrower defaults.
Overview of the Shared National Credit
(SNC) Program
 
 

The Shared National Credit (SNC) Program is an
interagency initiative administered jointly by the FDIC,
Federal Reserve Board, and the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency. The program was established in the 1970's
for the purpose of ensuring consistency among the three
federal banking regulators in the classification of large
syndicated credits.
Definition of a SNC
Any loan or formal loan commitment, including any asset
such as other real estate, stocks, notes, bonds and debentures
taken for debts previously contracted, extended to a
borrower by a supervised institution, or any of its
subsidiaries and affiliates, which in original amount
aggregates $100 million or more and, which is shared by
three or more unaffiliated institutions under a formal
lending agreement; or, a portion of which is sold to two or
more unaffiliated institutions, with the purchasing
institution(s) assuming its pro rata share of the credit risk.
SNCs generally include:
• Loans administered by a domestic office of a
supervised institution;
• Domestic commercial and real estate loans and all
international loans to borrowers in the private sector;
and
• Acceptances, commercial letters of credit, standby
letters of credit or similar bonds or guarantees, note
issuance facilities, revolving underwriting facilities,
Eurodollar facilities, syndications, and similar
extensions or commitments, and lease financing
receivables.
SNCs do not include:
• Credits shared solely between affiliated supervised
institutions;
• Private sector credits that are 100 percent guaranteed
by a sovereign entity;
• International credits or commitments administered in a
foreign office; or
• Direct credits to sovereign borrowers.
SNC Review and Rating Process
Teams of interagency examiners review and risk rate a
sample of credits at agent banks during the first and third
quarters of each year. Of note, SNC reviews occur regularly
at agent banks originating a significant level of SNC credits.
For agent banks with smaller SNC portfolios, credits are
only reviewed through the program on an ad hoc basis. The
SNC review sample is based on internal rating, industry,
size, and the number of regulated participants. The
regulatory rating assigned by an interagency team of
examiners is reported to all participating banks shortly after
the conclusion of the on-site review voting period. Ratings
remain active on a rolling two review basis (approximately
1 year), thus avoiding duplicate reviews of the same loan
and ensuring consistent treatment with regard to regulatory
credit ratings. Examiners should not change SNC ratings
during risk management examinations. Any material
change in a borrower’s condition should be reported to the
national SNC coordinator.
The SNC rating process includes risk rating, accrual and
TDR status. Impairment measurement and ALLL treatment
are not addressed in the SNC rating and should be reviewed
at each participant institution. Current and historical SNC
ratings can be accessed through the FDIC’s internal
systems. Designated SNC credits not reviewed in the
current SNC sample will be listed as “Not Rated.” These
credits may be reviewed separately at the participant
institution if significant to the examination scope or an
examiner believes that the credit may carry an adverse
rating.
The FDIC’s SNC office can provide examiners with
additional information to facilitate the review of “Not
Rated” credits or copies of line sheets used in the
interagency SNC review to help examiners explain rating
rationales to participant banks. In those situations where a
“Not Rated” credit is reviewed at the participant institution
and an adverse rating is assigned, examiners should
communicate their findings to the national SNC
coordinator.
SNC Rating Communication and Distribution Process
At the conclusion of each semi-annual SNC review,
electronic reports are generated, and notifications are sent
via email to participant institution contacts. They are
provided a link to retrieve a summary of ratings, applicable
loan write-ups, cover letter and a list of agent institution
contacts. These reports are available to examiners upon
request and can be retransmitted to the participant
institution contact if needed. The notification email also
marks the beginning of a 14 day window for banks to file an
appeal.
Appeals Process
Agent and participant banks may appeal any preliminary
rating. Agent and participant banks have 14 days from the
electronic distribution of preliminary results to submit an
appeal. The written appeal details the reasons why the
institution is disputing the classification and includes
documentation supporting the institution’s position. The
written appeal is sent to the applicable agency of the agent
institution for the credit in question. An interagency appeals
 
  

panel reviews the appeal, determines the final disposition of
the credit, and informs the institution of its decision in
writing. Ratings changed by the appeals process are
communicated electronically to all affected participant
banks.
Additional Risks Associated with Syndicated
Loan Participations
An institution that purchases a participation interest in large
loan syndications faces the same risks as an institution
purchasing an ordinary loan participation from another
institution. Examiners should reference the manual section
on Loan Participations for a more in depth discussion of
related risks. As discussed in that section, an institution
purchasing a participation loan is expected to perform the
same degree of independent credit analysis on the loan as if
it were the originator. The same holds true for banks
purchasing participation interests in large syndications.
Institutions that lack the resources or skill sets to perform an
independent credit analysis on a complex loan syndication
generally refrain from participating in such a transaction.
In some cases, an institution may enter into a subparticipation agreement in which the institution purchases a
piece of a participation from another syndicated loan
participant rather than directly from the agent institution.
As a result, the sub-participant may not be registered with
or known to the agent institution and may not receive timely
notification of risk ratings or adverse credit actions from
either the agent institution or the SNC system. Additionally,
sub-participants may not have the same legal rights or
remedies as participants of record in the syndicate, which
may give rise to other transactional and operational risk
concerns.

CREDIT SCORING
Automated credit scoring systems allow institutions to
underwrite and price loans more quickly than was possible
in the past. This efficiency has enabled some banks to
expand their lending into national markets and originate
loan volumes once considered infeasible. Scoring also
reduces unit-underwriting costs, while yielding a more
consistent loan portfolio that is easily securitized. These
benefits have been the primary motivation for the
proliferation of credit scoring systems among both large and
small institutions.
Credit scoring systems identify specific characteristics that
help define predictive variables for acceptable performance
(delinquency, amount owed on accounts, length of credit
history, home ownership, occupation, income, etc.) and
assign point values relative to their overall importance.
These values are then totaled to calculate a credit score,
which helps institutions to rank order risk for a given
population. Generally, an individual with a higher score
will perform better relative to an individual with a lower
credit score.
Few, if any, institutions have an automated underwriting
system where the credit score is used exclusively to make
the credit decision. Some level of human review is usually
present to provide the flexibility needed to address
individual circumstances. Institutions typically establish a
minimum cut-off score below which applicants are denied
and a second cutoff score above which applicants are
approved. However, there is usually a range, or “gray area,”
in between the two cut-off scores where credits are
manually reviewed and credit decisions are judgmentally
determined.
Most, if not all, systems also provide for overrides of
established cut-off scores. If the institution’s scoring
system effectively predicts loss rates and reflects
management’s risk parameters, excessive overrides will
negate the benefits of an automated scoring system.
Therefore, it is critical for management to monitor and
control overrides. Institutions typically develop acceptable
override limits and prepare monthly override reports that
provide comparisons over time and against the institution’s
parameters. Override reports also typically identify the
approving officer and include the reason for the override.
Although banks often use more than one type of credit
scoring methodology in their underwriting and account
management practices, many systems incorporate credit
bureau scores. Credit bureau scores are updated
periodically and validated on an ongoing basis against
performance in credit bureau files. Scores are designed to
be comparable across the major credit bureaus; however, the
ability of any score to estimate performance outcome
probabilities depends on the quality, quantity, and timely
submission of lender data to the various credit bureaus.
Often, the depth and thoroughness of data available to each
credit bureau varies, and as a consequence, the quality of
scores varies.
As a precaution, institutions that rely on credit bureau scores
often sample and compare credit bureau reports to
determine which credit bureau most effectively captures
data for the market(s) in which the institution does business.
For institutions that acquire credit from multiple regions,
use of multiple scorecards may be appropriate, depending
on apparent regional credit bureau strength. In some
instances, it may be worthwhile for institutions to pull
scores from each of the major credit bureaus and establish
rules for selecting an average value. By tracking credit
bureau scores over time and capturing performance data to
differentiate which score seems to best indicate probable
 
  

performance outcome, institutions can select the best score
for any given market. Documenting such efforts to
differentiate and select the best credit bureau score supports
a deliberative decision process.
Although some institutions develop their own scoring
models, most are built by outside vendors and subsequently
maintained by the institution. Vendors build scoring models
based upon specific information and parameters provided
by institution management. Therefore, management must
clearly communicate with the vendor and ensure that the
scorecard developer clearly understands the institution’s
objectives. Bank management that adheres closely to
vendor manual specifications for system maintenance and
management, particularly those that provide guidance for
periodically assessing performance of the system, achieve
the most reliable results.
Scoring models generally become less predictive as time
passes. Certain characteristics about an applicant, such as
income, job stability, and age change over time, as do
overall demographics. One-by-one, these changes will
result in significant shifts in the profile of the population.
Once a fundamental change in the profile occurs, the model
is less able to identify potentially good and bad applicants.
As these changes continue, the model loses its ability to rank
order risk. Thus, for the best results, institutions must
periodically validate the system’s predictability, refine
scoring characteristics when necessary, and document these
efforts.
Institutions initially used credit scoring for consumer
lending applications such as credit card, auto, and mortgage
lending. However, credit scoring eventually gained
acceptance in the small business sector. Depending on the
manner in which it is implemented, credit scoring for small
business lending may represent a fundamental shift in
underwriting philosophy if institutions view a small
business loan as more of a high-end consumer loan and,
thus, grant credit more on the strength of the principals’
personal credit history and less on the fundamental strength
of the business. While this may be appropriate in some
cases, it is important to remember that the income from
small business remains the primary source of repayment for
most loans. Institutions that do not analyze business
financial statements or periodically review their lines of
credit may lose an opportunity for early detection of credit
problems.
The effectiveness of any scoring system directly depends on
the policies and procedures established to guide and enforce
proper use. The most effective policies include an overview
of the institution’s scoring objectives and operations; the
establishment of authorities and responsibilities over
scoring systems; the use of a chronology log to track internal
and external events that affect the scoring system; the
establishment of institution officials responsible for
reporting, monitoring, and reviewing overrides; as well as
the provision of a scoring system maintenance program to
ensure that the system continues to rank risk and to predict
default and loss under the original parameters.
Examiners should refer to the Credit Card Specialty Bank
Examination Guidelines and the Credit Card Activities
section of the Examination Modules for additional
information on credit scoring systems.

SUBPRIME LENDING
Introduction
There is no universal definition of a subprime loan in the
industry, but subprime lending is generally characterized as
a lending program or strategy that targets borrowers who
pose a significantly higher risk of default than traditional
retail banking customers. Institutions often refer to
subprime lending by other names such as the nonprime,
nonconforming, high coupon, or alternative lending market.
Well-managed subprime lending can be a profitable
business line; however, it is a high-risk lending activity.
Successful subprime lenders carefully control the elevated
credit, operating, compliance, legal, market, and other risks
as well as the higher overhead costs associated with more
labor-intensive underwriting, servicing, and collections.
Subprime lending should only be conducted by institutions
that have a clear understanding of the business and its
inherent risks, and have determined these risks to be
acceptable and controllable given the institution’s staff,
financial condition, size, and level of capital support. In
addition, subprime lending should only be conducted within
a comprehensive lending program that employs strong risk
management practices to identify, measure, monitor, and
control the elevated risks that are inherent in this activity.
Finally, subprime lenders need to retain capital support that
is consistent with the volume and nature of the additional
risks assumed. If the risks associated with this activity are
not properly controlled, subprime lending may be
considered an unsafe and unsound banking practice.
The term, subprime, refers to the credit characteristics of the
borrower at the loan’s origination, rather than the type of
credit or collateral considerations. Subprime borrowers
typically have weakened credit histories that may include a
combination of payment delinquencies, charge-offs,
judgments, and bankruptcies. They may also display
reduced repayment capacity as measured by credit scores,
debt-to-income ratios, or other criteria. Generally,
subprime borrowers will display a range of credit risk
 
  

characteristics that may include one or more of the
following:
• Two or more 30-day delinquencies in the last 12
months, or one or more 60-day delinquencies in the
last 24 months;
• Judgment, foreclosure, repossession, or charge-off in
the prior 24 months;
• Bankruptcy in the last 5 years;
• Relatively high default probability as evidenced by,
for example, a Fair Isaac and Co. risk score (FICO) of
660 or below (depending on the product/collateral), or
other bureau or proprietary scores with an equivalent
default probability likelihood; and
• Debt service-to-income ratio of 50 percent or greater,
or otherwise limited ability to cover family living
expenses after deducting total monthly debt-service
requirements from monthly income.
This list is illustrative rather than exhaustive and is not
meant to define specific parameters for all subprime
borrowers. Additionally, this definition may not match all
market or institution-specific subprime definitions, but
should be viewed as a starting point from which examiners
should expand their review of the institution’s lending
program.
Subprime lenders typically use the criteria above to segment
prospects into subcategories such as, for example, A, B, C,
and D. However, subprime subcategories can vary
significantly among lenders based on the credit grading
criteria. What may be an “A” grade definition at one
institution may be a “B” grade at another institution, but
generally each grade represents a different level of credit
risk.
While the industry often includes borrowers with limited or
no credit histories in the subprime category, these borrowers
can represent a substantially different risk profile than those
with a derogatory credit history and are not inherently
considered subprime. Rather, consideration should be given
to underwriting criteria and portfolio performance when
determining whether a portfolio of loans to borrowers with
limited credit histories should be treated as subprime for
examination purposes.
Subprime lending typically refers to a lending program that
targets subprime borrowers. Institutions engaging in
subprime lending generally have knowingly and
purposefully focused on subprime lending through planned
business strategies, tailored products, and explicit borrower
targeting. An institution’s underwriting guidelines and
target markets should provide a basis for determining
whether it should be considered a subprime lender. The
average credit risk profile of subprime loan programs will
exhibit the credit risk characteristics listed above, and will
likely display significantly higher delinquency and/or loss
rates than prime portfolios. High interest rates and fees are
a common and relatively easily identifiable characteristic of
subprime lending. However, high interest rates and fees by
themselves do not constitute subprime lending.
Subprime lending does not include traditional consumer
lending that has historically been the mainstay of
community banking, nor does it include making loans to
subprime borrowers as discretionary exceptions to the
institution’s prime retail lending policy. In addition,
subprime lending does not refer to: prime loans that develop
credit problems after acquisition; loans initially extended in
subprime programs that are later upgraded, as a result of
their performance, to programs targeted to prime borrowers;
or community development loans as defined in the CRA
regulations.
For supervisory purposes, a subprime lender is defined as
an insured institution or institution subsidiary that has a
subprime lending program with an aggregate credit
exposure greater than or equal to 25 percent of Tier 1 capital
plus ALLL. Aggregate exposure includes principal
outstanding and committed, accrued and unpaid interest,
and any retained residual assets relating to securitized
subprime loans.
Capitalization
The FDIC’s minimum capital requirements generally apply
to portfolios that exhibit substantially lower risk profiles
than exist in subprime loan programs. Therefore, these
requirements may not be sufficient to reflect the risks
associated with subprime portfolios. Each subprime lender
is responsible for quantifying the amount of capital needed
to offset the additional risk in subprime lending activities,
and for fully documenting the methodology and analysis
supporting the amount specified.
Examiners will evaluate the capital adequacy of subprime
lenders on a case-by-case basis, considering, among other
factors, the institution’s own documented analysis of the
capital needed to support its subprime lending activities.
Capital levels are typically risk sensitive, that is, allocated
capital should reflect the level and variability of loss
estimates within reasonably conservative parameters.
Institutions generally specify a direct link between the
estimated loss rates used to determine an appropriate ALLL,
and the unexpected loss estimates used to determine capital.
The sophistication of this analysis should be commensurate
with the size, concentration level, and relative risk of the
institution’s subprime lending activities and consider the
following elements:
• Portfolio growth rates;
• Trends in the level and volatility of expected losses;
 
  

• The level of subprime loan losses incurred over one or
more economic downturns, if such data/analyses are
available;
• The impact of planned underwriting or marketing
changes on the credit characteristics of the portfolio,
including the relative levels of risk of default, loss in
the event of default, and the level of classified assets;
• Any deterioration in the average credit quality over
time due to adverse selection or retention;
• The amount, quality, and liquidity of collateral
securing the individual loans;
• Any asset, income, or funding source concentrations;
• The degree of concentration of subprime credits;
• The extent to which current capitalization consists of
residual assets or other potentially volatile
components;
• The degree of legal and other risks associated with the
subprime business line(s) pursued; and
• The amount of capital necessary to support the
institution’s other risks and activities.
Given the higher risk inherent in subprime lending
programs, examiners should reasonably expect, as a starting
point, that an institution would hold capital against such
portfolios in an amount that is one and one half to three
times greater than what is appropriate for non-subprime
assets of a similar type. Refinements typically depend on
the factors analyzed above, with particular emphasis on the
trends in the level and volatility of loss rates, and the
amount, quality, and liquidity of collateral securing the
loans. Institutions with significant subprime programs
generally have capital ratios that are well above the averages
for their traditional peer groups or other similarly situated
institutions that are not engaged in subprime lending.
Some subprime asset pools warrant increased supervisory
scrutiny and monitoring, but not necessarily additional
capital. For example, well-secured loans to borrowers who
are slightly below what is considered prime quality may
entail minimal additional risks compared to prime loans,
and may not require additional capital if adequate controls
are in place to address the additional risks. On the other
hand, institutions that underwrite higher-risk subprime
pools, such as unsecured loans or high loan-to-value second
mortgages, may need significantly higher levels of capital,
perhaps as high as 100% of the loans outstanding depending
on the level and volatility of risk. Because of the higher
inherent risk levels and the increased impact that subprime
portfolios may have on an institution’s overall capital,
examiners should document and reference each institution’s
subprime capital evaluation in their comments and
conclusions regarding capital adequacy.
Stress Testing
An institution’s capital adequacy analysis typically includes
stress testing as a tool for estimating unexpected losses in
its subprime lending pools. Institutions may project the
performance of their subprime loan pools under
conservative stress test scenarios, including an estimation of
the portfolio’s susceptibility to deteriorating economic,
market, and business conditions. Portfolio stress testing
scenarios may include “shock” testing of basic assumptions
such as delinquency rates, loss rates, and recovery rates on
collateral. It may also consider other potentially adverse
scenarios, such as: changing attrition or prepayment rates;
changing utilization rates for revolving products; changes in
credit score distribution; and changes in the capital markets
demand for whole loans, or asset-backed securities
supported by subprime loans.
These are representative examples. Actual factors will vary
by product, market segment, and the size and complexity of
the portfolio relative to the institution’s overall operations.
Whether stress test scenarios are performed manually, or
through automated modeling techniques, the Regulatory
Agencies will expect that:
• The process is clearly documented, rational, and easily
understood by the board and senior management;
• The inputs are reliable and relate directly to the
subject portfolios;
• Assumptions are well documented and conservative;
and
• Any models are subject to a comprehensive validation
process.
The results of the stress test exercises should be a
documented factor in the analysis and determination of
capital adequacy for the subprime portfolios.
Institutions that engage in subprime lending without
adequate procedures to estimate and document the level of
capital necessary to support their activities should be
criticized. Where capital is deemed inadequate to support
the risk in subprime lending activities, examiners should
consult with their regional office to determine the
appropriate course of action.
Risk Management
The following items are essential components of an
effective risk management program for subprime lenders.
Planning and Strategy. Prior to engaging in subprime
lending, the board and management ensure that proposed
activities are consistent with the institution's overall
business strategy and risk tolerances, and that all involved
parties have properly acknowledged and addressed critical
business risk issues. These issues include the costs
 
  

associated with attracting and retaining qualified personnel,
investments in the technology necessary to manage a more
complex portfolio, a clear solicitation and origination
strategy that allows for after-the-fact assessment of
underwriting performance, and establishing appropriate
feedback and control systems. Appropriate risk assessment
processes extend beyond credit risk and appropriately
incorporate operating, compliance, market, liquidity, and
legal risks.
Institutions establishing an appropriate subprime lending
program proceed slowly and cautiously into this activity to
minimize the impact of unforeseen personnel, technology,
or internal control problems and to determine if favorable
initial profitability estimates are realistic and sustainable.
Strategic plan performance analysis is generally conducted
frequently in order to detect adverse trends or circumstances
and take appropriate action in a timely manner.
Management and Staff. Prior to engaging in subprime
lending, the board typically ensures that management and
staff possess sufficient expertise to appropriately manage
the risks in subprime lending and that staffing levels are
adequate for the planned volume of activity. Subprime
lending requires specialized knowledge and skills that many
financial institutions may not possess. Marketing, account
origination, and collections strategies and techniques often
differ from those employed for prime credit; thus it is
generally not sufficient to have the same staff responsible
for both subprime and prime loans. Servicing and collecting
subprime loans can be very labor intensive and requires a
greater volume of staff with smaller caseloads. Lenders
should monitor staffing levels, staff experience, and the
need for additional training as performance is assessed over
time. Compensation programs should not depend primarily
on volume or growth targets. Any targets used should be
weighted towards factors such as portfolio quality and riskadjusted profitability.
Lending Policies and Procedures. Lenders typically have
comprehensive written policies and procedures, specific to
each subprime lending product that set limits on the amount
of risk that will be assumed and address how the institution
will control portfolio quality and avoid excessive exposure.
Prudent institutions implement policies and procedures
before initiating the activity. Institutions may originate
subprime loans through a variety of channels, including
dealers, brokers, correspondents, and marketing firms.
Regardless of the source, it is critical that underwriting
policies and procedures incorporate the risk tolerances
established by the board and management and explicitly
define underwriting criteria and exception processes.
Subprime lending policies and procedures typically address
the items outlined in the loan reference module of the ED
Modules for subprime lending. If the institution elects to
use scoring systems for approvals or pricing, the model
should be tailored to address the behavioral and credit
characteristics of the subprime population targeted and the
products offered. It is generally not acceptable to rely on
models developed for standard risk borrowers or products.
Furthermore, the models should be reviewed frequently and
updated as necessary to ensure assumptions remain valid.
Given the higher credit risk associated with the subprime
borrower, effective subprime lenders use mitigating
underwriting guidelines and risk-based pricing to reduce the
overall risk of the loan. These guidelines include lower
loan-to-value ratio requirements and lower maximum loan
amounts relative to each risk grade within the portfolio.
Given the high-risk nature of subprime lending, the need for
thorough analysis and documentation is heightened relative
to prime lending. Compromises in analysis or
documentation can substantially increase the risk and
severity of loss. In addition, successful subprime lenders
develop criteria for limiting the risk profile of borrowers
selected, giving consideration to factors such as the
frequency, recentness, and severity of delinquencies and
derogatory items; length of time with re-established credit;
and reason for the poor credit history.
Since the past credit deficiencies of subprime borrowers
reflect a higher risk profile, appropriate subprime loan
programs are based upon the borrowers’ current reasonable
ability to repay and a prudent debt amortization schedule.
Loan repayment should not be based upon foreclosure
proceedings or collateral repossession. Institutions are to
recognize the additional default risks and determine if these
risks are acceptable and controllable without resorting to
foreclosure or repossession that could have been
predetermined by the loan structure at inception.
Profitability and Pricing. A key consideration for lenders
in the subprime market is the ability to earn risk-adjusted
yields that appropriately compensate the institution for the
increased risk and costs assumed. Successful institutions
have a comprehensive framework for pricing decisions and
profitability analysis that considers all costs associated with
each subprime product, including origination,
administrative/servicing, expected charge-offs, funding,
and capital. In addition, such pricing frameworks allow for
fluctuations in the economic cycle. Fees often comprise a
significant portion of revenue in subprime lending.
Consideration should be given to the portion of revenues
derived from fees and the extent to which the fees are a
recurring and viable source of revenue. Profitability
projections typically are incorporated into the business plan.
Also, effective management teams track actual performance
against projections regularly and have a process for
addressing variances.
Loan Review and Monitoring. Consistent with the safety
and soundness standards prescribed in Appendix A to Part
 
  

364 of the FDIC Rules and Regulations, institutions must
have comprehensive analysis and information systems that
identify, measure, monitor and control the risks associated
with subprime lending. Such analysis promotes
understanding of the portfolio and early identification of
adverse quality/performance trends. Systems employed
must possess the level of detail necessary to properly
evaluate subprime activity. Examples of portfolio
segmentation and trend analyses are discussed in the
subprime lending loan reference module of the ED
Modules.
Comprehensive analysis considers the effects of portfolio
growth and seasoning, which can mask true performance by
distorting delinquency and loss ratios. Vintage, lagged
delinquency, and lagged loss analysis methods are
sometimes used to account for growth, seasoning, and
changes in underwriting. Analysis should also take into
account the effect of cure programs on portfolio
performance. Refer to the glossary of the Credit Card
Specialty Bank Examination Guidelines for definitions of
vintage, roll rate, and migration analysis.
Servicing and Collections. Defaults occur sooner and in
greater volume than in prime lending; thus a well-developed
servicing and collections function is essential for the
effective management of subprime lending. Strong
procedures and controls are necessary throughout the
servicing process; however, particular attention is warranted
in the areas of new loan setup and collections to ensure the
early intervention necessary to properly manage higher risk
borrowers. Prudent lenders also have well-defined written
collection policies and procedures that address default
management (e.g., cure programs and repossessions),
collateral disposition, and strategies to minimize
delinquencies and losses. This aspect of subprime lending
is very labor intensive but critical to the program's success.
Cure programs include practices such as loan restructuring,
re-aging, renewal, extension, or consumer credit
counseling. Cure programs typically are used only when the
institution has substantiated the customer’s renewed
willingness and ability to pay. Appropriate controls help
ensure cure programs do not mask poor initial credit risk
selection or defer losses. Effective subprime lenders may
use short-term loan restructure programs to assist borrowers
in bringing loans current when warranted, but will often
continue to report past due status on a contractual basis.
Cure programs that alter the contractual past due status may
mask actual portfolio performance and inhibit the ability of
management to understand and monitor the true credit
quality of the portfolio.
Repossession and resale programs are integral to the
subprime business model. Policies and procedures for
foreclosure and repossession activities typically specifically
address the types of cost/benefit analysis to be performed
before pursuing collateral, including valuation methods
employed; timing of foreclosure or repossession; and
accounting and legal requirements. Effective policies
clearly outline whether the institution will finance the sale
of the repossessed collateral, and if so, the limitations that
apply. Institutions that track the performance of such loans
are able to assess the adequacy of these policies.
Compliance and Legal Risks. Subprime lenders generally
run a greater risk of incurring legal action given the higher
fees, interest rates, and profits; targeting customers who
have little experience with credit or damaged credit records;
and aggressive collection efforts. Because the risk is
dependent, in part, upon the public perception of a lender’s
practices, the nature of these risks is inherently
unpredictable. Institutions that engage in subprime lending
must take special care to avoid violating consumer
protection laws. An adequate compliance management
program must identify, monitor and control the consumer
protection hazards associated with subprime lending. The
institution should have a process in place to handle the
potential for heightened legal action. In addition,
management should have a system in place to monitor
consumer complaints for recurring issues and ensure
appropriate action is taken to resolve legitimate disputes.
Audit. The institution’s audit scope should provide for
comprehensive independent reviews of subprime activities.
Appropriate audit procedures include, among other things,
a sample of a sufficient volume of accounts to verify the
integrity of the records, particularly with respect to
payments processing.
Third Parties. Subprime lenders may use third parties for
a number of functions from origination to collections. In
dealing with high credit-risk products, effective
management teams take steps to ensure that exposures from
third-party practices or financial instability are minimized.
This includes proper due diligence performed prior to
contracting with a third party vendor and on an ongoing
basis. Appropriate contracts provide the institution with the
ability to control and monitor third party activities (e.g.
growth restrictions, underwriting guidelines, outside audits,
etc.) and discontinue relationships that prove detrimental to
the institution.
Special care must be taken when purchasing loans from
third party originators. Some originators who sell subprime
loans charge borrowers high up-front fees, which may be
financed into the loan. These fees provide incentive for
originators to produce a high volume of loans with little
emphasis on quality, to the detriment of a potential
purchaser. These fees also increase the likelihood that the
originator will attempt to refinance the loans. Appropriate
contracts restrict the originator from the churning of
 
  

customers. Further, subprime loans, especially those
purchased from outside the institution's lending area, are at
special risk for fraud or misrepresentation. Effective
management also ensures that third party conflicts of
interest are avoided. For example, if a loan originator
provides recourse for poorly performing loans purchased by
the institution, the originator or related interest thereof
should not also be responsible for processing and
determining the past due status of the loans.
Securitizations. Securitizing subprime loans carries
inherent risks, including interim credit, liquidity, interest
rate, and other risks, that are potentially greater than those
for securitizing prime loans. The subprime loan secondary
market can be volatile, resulting in significant liquidity risk
when originating a large volume of loans intended for
securitization and sale. Investors can quickly lose their
appetite for risk in an economic downturn or when financial
markets become volatile. As a result, institutions may be
forced to sell loan pools at deep discounts. If an institution
lacks adequate personnel, risk management procedures, or
capital support to hold subprime loans originally intended
for sale, these loans may strain an institution's liquidity,
asset quality, earnings, and capital. Consequently,
institutions actively involved in the securitization and sale
of subprime loans typically develop a contingency plan that
addresses back-up purchasers of the securities, whole loans,
or the attendant servicing functions, alternate funding
sources, and measures for raising additional capital. An
institution’s liquidity and funding structure should not be
overly dependent upon the sale of subprime loans.
Given some of the unique characteristics of subprime
lending, accounting for the securitization process requires
assumptions that can be difficult to quantify reliably, and
erroneous assumptions can lead to the significant
overstatement of an institution's assets. Prudent institutions
take a conservative approach when accounting for these
transactions and ensure compliance with existing regulatory
guidance. Refer to outstanding examination instructions for
further information regarding securitizations.
Classification
The Uniform Retail Credit Classification and Account
Management Policy (Retail Classification Policy) governs
the evaluation of consumer loans. This policy establishes
general classification thresholds based on delinquency, but
also grants examiners the discretion to classify individual
retail loans that exhibit signs of credit weakness regardless
of delinquency status. An examiner may also classify retail
portfolios, or segments thereof, where underwriting
standards are weak and present unreasonable credit risk, and
may criticize account management practices that are
deficient. Given the high-risk nature of subprime portfolios
and their greater potential for loan losses, the delinquency
thresholds for classification set forth in the Retail
Classification Policy should be considered minimums.
Well-managed subprime lenders recognize the heightened
risk-of-loss characteristics in their portfolios and, if
warranted, internally classify their delinquent accounts well
before the timeframes outlined in the interagency policy. If
examination classifications are more severe than the Retail
Classification Policy suggests, the examination report
should explain the weaknesses in the portfolio and fully
document the methodology used to determine adverse
classifications.
ALLL Analysis
An institution’s appropriately documented ALLL analysis
identifies subprime loans as a specific risk exposure
separate from the prime portfolio. In addition, the analysis
segments the subprime lending portfolios by risk exposure
such as specific product, vintage, origination channel, risk
grade, loan to value ratio, or other grouping deemed
relevant.
Adversely classified subprime loans (to include, at a
minimum, all loans past due 90 days or more) should be
reviewed for impairment, and an appropriate allowance
should be established consistent with accounting
requirements. For subprime loans that are not adversely
classified, the ALLL should be sufficient to absorb at least
all estimated credit losses on outstanding balances over the
current operating cycle, typically 12 months. To the extent
that the historical net charge-off rate is used to estimate
credit losses, it should be adjusted for changes in trends,
conditions, and other relevant factors, including business
volume, underwriting, risk selection, account management
practices, and current economic or business conditions that
may alter such experience.
Subprime Auto Lending
Underwriting. Subprime auto lenders use risk-based
pricing of loans in addition to more stringent advance rates,
discounting, and dealer reserves than those typically used
for prime auto loans to mitigate the increased credit risk. As
credit risk increases, advance rates on collateral decrease
while interest rates, dealer paper discounts, and dealer
reserves increase. In addition to lower advance rates,
collateral values are typically based on the wholesale value
of the car. Lenders will typically treat a new dealer with
greater caution, using higher discounts and/or purchasing
the dealer’s higher quality paper until a database and
working relationship is developed.
Servicing and Collections. Repossession is quick,
generally ranging between 30 to 60 days past due and
sometimes earlier. The capacity of a repossession and
 
  

resale operation operated by a prime lender could easily be
overwhelmed if the lender begins targeting subprime
borrowers, leaving the lender unable to dispose of cars
quickly. Resale methods include wholesale auction, retail
lot sale, and/or maintaining a database of retail contacts.
While retail sale will command a greater price, subprime
lenders may consider limiting the time allocated to retail
sales before sending cars to auction in order to ensure
adequate cash flow and avoid excessive inventory build-up.
Refinancing resales are usually limited and tightly
controlled, as this practice can mask losses. Lenders
typically implement a system for tracking the location of the
collateral.
Subprime Residential Real Estate Lending
Underwriting. To mitigate the increased risk, subprime
residential real estate lenders use risk-based pricing in
addition to more conservative LTV ratio requirements and
cash-out restrictions than those typically used for prime
mortgage loans. As the credit risk of the borrower increases,
the interest rate increases and the loan-to-value ratio and
cash-out limit decreases. Prudent loan-to-value ratios are an
essential risk mitigant in subprime real estate lending and
generally range anywhere from 85 percent to 90 percent for
A- loans, to 65 percent for lower grades. High loan-to-value
(HLTV) loans are generally not considered prudent in
subprime lending. HLTV loans should be targeted at
individuals who warrant large unsecured debt, and then only
in accordance with outstanding regulatory guidance. The
appraisal process takes on increased importance given the
greater emphasis on collateral. Prepayment penalties are
sometimes used on subprime real estate loans, where
allowed by law, given that prepayment rates are generally
higher and more volatile for subprime real estate loans.
Government Sponsored entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac, have participated in the subprime mortgage market to
a limited degree through purchases of subprime loans and
guarantees of subprime securitizations.
Servicing and Collections. Collection calls begin early,
generally within the first 10 days of delinquency, within the
framework of existing laws. Lenders generally send written
correspondence of intent to foreclosure or initiate other
legal action early, often as early as 31 days delinquent. The
foreclosure process is generally initiated as soon as allowed
by law. Updated collateral valuations are typically obtained
early in the collections process to assist in determining
appropriate collection efforts. Frequent collateral
inspections are often used by lenders to monitor the
condition of the collateral.
Subprime Credit Card Lending
Underwriting. Subprime credit card lenders use risk-based
pricing as well as tightly controlled credit limits to mitigate
the increased credit risk. In addition, lenders may require
full or partial collateral coverage, typically in the form of a
deposit account at the institution, for the higher-risk
segments of the subprime market. Initial credit lines are set
at low levels, such as $300 to $1,000, and subsequent line
increases are typically smaller than for prime credit card
accounts. Increases in credit lines should be subject to
stringent underwriting criteria similar to that required at
origination.
Underwriting for subprime credit cards is typically based
upon credit scores generated by sophisticated scoring
models. These scoring models use a substantial number of
attributes, including the frequency, severity, and recency of
previous delinquencies and major, derogatory items, to
determine the probability of loss for a potential borrower.
Subprime lenders typically target particular subprime
populations through prescreening models, such as
individuals who have recently emerged from bankruptcy.
Review of the attributes in these models often reveals the
nature of the institution’s target population.
Servicing and Collections. Lenders continually monitor
customer behavior and credit quality and take proactive
measures to avert potential problems, such as decreasing or
freezing credit lines or providing consumer counseling,
before the problems become severe or in some instances
before the loans become delinquent. Lenders often use
sophisticated scoring systems to assist in monitoring credit
quality and frequently re-score customers. Collection calls
on delinquent loans begin early, generally within the first 10
days delinquent, and sometimes as early as 1-day
delinquent, within the framework of existing laws. Lenders
generally send written correspondence within the first 30
days in addition to calling. Account suspensions occur
early, generally within the first 45 days of delinquency or
immediately upon a negative event such as refusal to pay.
Accounts over 90 days past due are generally subject to
account closure and charge-off. In addition, account
closures based upon a borrower’s action, such as repeated
refusal to pay or broken promises to bring the account
current within a specified time frame, may occur at any time
in the collection process. Account closure practices are
generally more aggressive for relatively new credit card
accounts, such as those originated in the last six months.
Payday Lending
Payday lending is a subset of subprime lending. Payday
loans are usually priced at a fixed dollar fee per $100
borrowed, which represents the finance charge. Because
these loans have such short terms to maturity, usually
ranging from 14 to 45 days, the cost of borrowing, expressed
as an annual percentage rate may be high.
 
 

In return for the loan, the borrower usually provides the
lender with a debit authorization for the amount of the loan
plus the fee. Repayment is often provided through an
electronic payment of the fee and the advance with the next
direct deposit. In addition, lenders allow payment by mail
or other means rather than electronic transfer, and may
charge a lower fee/finance charge for consumers that choose
to pay electronically. If the borrower informs the lender that
he or she does not have the funds to repay the loan, the loan
is often refinanced through payment of another fee.
General
The examination instructions described in this section apply
to banks with payday lending programs that the bank
administers directly or through a third party that partners
with the bank to offer payday loans to consumers. These
instructions do not apply to situations where a bank makes
occasional small-dollar loans as an accommodation to
borrowers that do not fall within the definition of payday
loans above nor do they apply to banks offering products
and services, such as deposit accounts and extensions of
credit, to non-bank payday lenders. These instructions
apply regardless of whether an institution is a subprime
lender, as described in the section above.
Due to the heightened safety and soundness risks posed by
payday lending, concurrent risk management and consumer
protection examinations should be conducted absent
overriding resource or scheduling problems. In all cases, a
review of each discipline's examinations and workpapers
should be part of the examination planning process.
Relevant state examinations also should be reviewed. The
subprime lending loan reference module of the ED Modules
provides procedures to assist examiners in evaluating a
payday lending program.
Examiners may conduct targeted examinations of a third
party bank partner where appropriate. Authority to conduct
examinations of third parties may be established under
several circumstances, including through the bank's written
agreement with the third party, section 7 of the Bank Service
Company Act, or through powers granted under section 10
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Third party
examination activities would typically include, but not be
limited to, a review of compensation and staffing practices;
marketing and pricing policies; management information
systems; and compliance with bank policy as well as
applicable laws and regulations. Third party reviews should
also include testing of individual loans for compliance with
underwriting and loan administration guidelines, and
appropriate treatment under delinquency, and re-aging and
cure programs.
Underwriting
Institutions making payday loans may use a variety of
underwriting techniques, such as scoring systems, review of
current pay stub or proof of a regular income source and
evidence that the customer has a checking account,
consultation of nationwide databases that track bounced
checks and persons with outstanding payday loans, among
others. As described above, the Interagency Guidelines
Establishing Standards for Safety and Soundness
(Guidelines) set out the safety and soundness standards that
the agencies use to identify and address problems at insured
depository institutions before capital becomes
impaired. The Loan Documentation prong of the
Guidelines addresses assessing the ability of the borrower
to repay the indebtedness in a timely manner and ensuring
that any claim against a borrower is legally
enforceable. The Credit Underwriting prong addresses
providing for consideration, prior to credit commitment, of
the borrower's overall financial condition and resources, the
financial responsibility of any guarantor, the nature and
value of any underlying collateral, and the borrower's
character and willingness to repay as agreed. Institutions
that choose to offer payday loans with strong risk
management frameworks might adopt the following
controls, among others, to demonstrate their conformance
with these prongs of the Guidelines:
• Consideration of the consumer’s overall short-term
debt obligations relative to resources;
• Consideration of the total length of time a consumer
has had payday loan debt outstanding as an indication
of the customer’s ability to repay the payday loan
according to its term without reborrowing; and
• Consideration of any applicable laws and regulations.
Payday Lending Through Third Parties
Insured depository institutions may have payday lending
programs that they administer directly, using their own
employees, or they may enter into arrangements with third
parties. In the latter arrangements, the institution typically
enters into an agreement in which the institution funds
payday loans originated through the third party. These
arrangements also may involve the sale to the third party of
the loans or servicing rights to the loans. Institutions also
may rely on the third party to provide additional services
that the institution might otherwise provide, including
collections, advertising and soliciting applications. The
existence of third party arrangements when not properly
managed, can increase institutions’ transaction and legal
risks.
The use of third parties in no way diminishes the
responsibility of the board of directors and management to
ensure that the activity performed on behalf of the bank is
 
 
conducted in a safe and sound manner that complies with
applicable consumer protection laws. Appropriate
corrective actions, including enforcement actions, may be
pursued for deficiencies related to a third-party relationship
that poses safety and soundness issues or compliance with
consumer protection laws.
The FDIC's principal concern relating to third parties is
whether effective risk controls are implemented. Examiners
should assess the institution's risk management program for
third-party payday lending relationships. An assessment of
third-party relationships should include an evaluation of the
bank's risk assessment and strategic planning, as well as the
bank's due diligence process for selecting a competent and
qualified third party provider. Examiners should determine
whether arrangements with third parties are guided by a
written contract and approved by the institution’s board.
Appropriate arrangements typically:
• Describe the duties and responsibilities of each party,
including the scope of the arrangement;
• Specify that the third party will comply with all
applicable laws and regulations;
• Specify which party will provide consumer
compliance related disclosures;
• Authorize the institution to monitor the third party and
periodically review and verify that the third party and
its representatives are complying with its agreement
with the institution;
• Authorize the institution and the appropriate banking
agency to have access to such records of the third
party and conduct onsite transaction testing and
operational reviews at the third party locations as
necessary or appropriate to evaluate such compliance;
• Require the third party to indemnify the institution for
potential liability resulting from action of the third
party with regard to the payday lending program; and
• Address customer complaints, including any
responsibility for third-party forwarding and
responding to such complaints.
Effective bank management sufficiently monitors the third
party with respect to its activities and performance. This
includes dedicating sufficient staff with the necessary
expertise to oversee the third party. An appropriate
oversight program also includes monitoring the third party’s
financial condition, internal controls, and the quality of its
service and support, including the resolution of consumer
complaints if handled by the third party. Oversight
programs that are documented sufficiently facilitate the
monitoring and management of the risks associated with
third-party relationships.
Concentrations
Given the potential risk of payday lending, concentrations
of credit in this line of business pose a significant safety and
soundness concern. In the context of payday lending, a
concentration would be defined as a volume of payday loans
totaling 25 percent or more of an institution’s common
equity tier 1 capital plus the ALLL or the ACL for loans and
leases, as applicable. Appropriate supervisory action may be
necessary to address concentrations, including directing the
institution to reduce its loans to an appropriate level, or
raising additional capital.
Capital Adequacy
The minimum capital requirements generally apply to
portfolios that exhibit substantially lower risk profiles and
that are subject to more stringent underwriting procedures
than exist in payday lending programs. Therefore,
minimum capital requirements may not be sufficient to
offset the risks associated with payday lending. Institutions
that underwrite payday loans may need to maintain capital
levels as high as one hundred percent of the loans
outstanding (i.e. dollar-for-dollar capital), depending on the
level and volatility of risk. Risks to consider when
determining the appropriate amount of capital include the
unsecured nature of the credit, the relative levels of risk of
default, loss in the event of default, and the level of
classified assets. The degree of legal risk associated with
payday lending should also be considered, especially as it
relates to third party agreements.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
As with other loan types, institutions should maintain an
ALLL or an ACL for loans and leases as applicable, that is
appropriate to absorb estimated credit losses with the
payday portfolio. Although the contractual term of each
payday loan may be short, institutions’ methodologies for
estimating credit losses on these loans should take into
account if payday loans remain outstanding for longer
periods because of renewals and rollovers. In addition,
examiners should evaluate the institution’s assessment of
the collectibility of accrued fees and finance charges on
payday loans and whether the institution employs
appropriate methods to ensure that income is accurately
measured.
Examiners should determine that institutions engaged in
payday lending have methodologies and analyses in place
that demonstrate and document that the level of the ALLL
or the ACL for payday loans is appropriate. The application
of historical loss rates to the payday loan portfolio, adjusted
for the current environmental factors, including reasonable
and supportable forecast for institutions that have adopted
CECL, is one way to determine the ALLL or ACL needed
for these loans. Environmental factors include levels of and
trends in delinquencies and charge-offs, trends in loan
 


volume, effects of changes in risk selection and
underwriting standards and in account management
practices, and current economic conditions. Examiners
should be mindful that for institutions that do not have loss
experience of their own, it may be appropriate to reference
the payday loan loss experience of other institutions with
payday loan portfolios with similar attributes. Other
methods, such as loss estimation models, are acceptable if
they estimate losses in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. Examiners should review
documentation to determine that institutions’ loss estimates
and allowance methodologies reflect consideration of the
principles discussed in the 2001 and 2006 Interagency
policy statements on ALLL, or if the institution has adopted
CECL, the 2020 Interagency Policy Statement on
Allowances for Credit Losses.
Classifications
The Retail Classification Policy addresses general
classification thresholds for consumer loans based on
delinquency, but also discusses examiners’ discretion to
classify individual retail loans that exhibit signs of credit
weakness regardless of delinquency status. Examiners also
may classify retail portfolios, or segments thereof, where
underwriting standards are weak and present unreasonable
credit risk, and may criticize account management practices
that are deficient.
Payday loans may have well-defined weaknesses that may
jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. Weaknesses include
limited or no analysis of repayment capacity and the
unsecured nature of the credit. In addition, payday loan
portfolios can be characterized by a marked proportion of
obligors whose paying capacity is questionable, and such
Payday loans are typically classified as Substandard.
Payday loans for which the institution has documented
adequate paying capacity of the obligors and/or sufficient
collateral protection or credit enhancement are not
classified.
Payday loans that have been outstanding for extended
periods of time evidence a high risk of loss. While such
loans may have some recovery value, it is not practical or
desirable to defer writing off these essentially worthless
assets. Short-term Payday loans that are outstanding for
greater than 60 days from origination generally meet the
definition of Loss. In certain circumstances, earlier chargeoff may be appropriate (e.g., the institution does not renew
beyond the first payday and the borrower is unable to pay,
the institution closes an account). The institution’s policies
regarding consecutive advances also should be considered
when determining Loss classifications. Where the
economic substance of consecutive advances is
substantially similar to “rollovers” – without intervening
“cooling off” or waiting periods – examiners should treat
these loans as continuous advances and classify
accordingly.
Renewals/Rewrites
The Retail Classification Policy provides guidelines for
extensions, deferrals, renewals, or rewrites of closed-end
accounts. Despite the short-term nature of payday loans,
borrowers that request an extension, deferral, renewal, or
rewrite are typically expected by institutions to exhibit a
renewed willingness and ability to repay the loan.
Institutions can refer to the Retail Classification Policy
principles that address the use of extensions, deferrals,
renewals, or rewrites of payday loans. In consideration of
the Retail Classification Policy, institutions typically:
• Limit the number and frequency of extensions,
deferrals, renewals, and rewrites;
• Prohibit additional advances to finance unpaid interest
and fees and simultaneous loans to the same customer;
and
• Ensure that comprehensive and effective risk
management, reporting, and internal controls are
established and maintained.
Accrued Fees and Finance Charges
Examiners should determine whether institutions evaluate
the collectibility of accrued fees and finance charges on
payday loans because a portion of accrued interest and fees
is generally not collectible. (For more guidance on
accounting for delinquency fees, refer to ASC Section 310-
10-25, Receivables – Overall - Recognition.) Although
regulatory reporting instructions do not require payday
loans to be placed on nonaccrual based on delinquency
status, examiners should assess whether the institution
employs appropriate methods to ensure that income is
accurately measured. Such methods may include providing
loss allowances for uncollectible fees and finance charges
or placing delinquent and impaired receivables on
nonaccrual status. After a loan is placed on nonaccrual
status, subsequent fees and finance charges imposed on the
borrower would not be recognized in income and accrued,
but unpaid fees and finance charges normally would be
reversed from income.
Recovery Practices
After a loan is charged off, institutions must properly report
any subsequent collections on the loan (refer to ASC
Section 310-10-25, Receivables – Overall - Recognition.)
Typically, some or all of such collections are reported as
recoveries to the ALLL or ACL for loans and leases. In
some instances, the total amount credited to the ALLL or
ACL for loans and leases as recoveries on an individual loan
(which may have included principal, finance charges, and

  

fees) may exceed the amount previously charged off against
the ALLL or ACL on that loan (which may have been
limited to principal). Such a practice understates an
institution's net charge-off experience, which is an
important indicator of the credit quality and performance of
an institution's portfolio.
Consistent with regulatory reporting instructions, recoveries
represent collections on amounts that were previously
charged off against the ALLL or ACL for loans and leases.
Accordingly, institutions must ensure that the total amount
credited to the ALLL or ACL as recoveries on a loan is
limited to the amount previously charged off on that loan.
Any amounts collected in excess of this limit should be
recognized as income.